				 				 			 			This ebook is the product of many hours of hard work by volunteers for Standard Ebooks, and builds on the hard work of other literature lovers made possible by the public domain.

			This particular ebook is based on a transcription produced for Project Gutenberg and on digital scans available at the Internet Archive.

			The writing and artwork within are believed to be in the U.S. public domain, and Standard Ebooks releases this ebook edition under the terms in the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication. For full license information, see the Uncopyright at the end of this ebook.

			Standard Ebooks is a volunteer-driven project that produces ebook editions of public domain literature using modern typography, technology, and editorial standards, and distributes them free of cost. You can download this and other ebooks carefully produced for true book lovers at standardebooks.org.





Dramatis Personae


			 				 					Subtle, the Alchemist.



				 					Face, the Housekeeper.



				 					Dol Common, their Colleague.



				 					Dapper, a Lawyer’s Clerk.



				 					Drugger, a Tobacco Man.



				 					Lovewit, Master of the House.



				 					Sir Epicure Mammon, a Knight.



				 					Pertinax Surly, a Gamester.



				 					Tribulation Wholesome, a Pastor of Amsterdam.



				 					Ananias, a Deacon there.



				 					Kastril, the angry Boy.



				 					Dame Pliant, his Sister, a Widow.



				 					Neighbours.



				 					Officers, Attendants, etc.





			Scene⁠—London.





		 			The Alchemist to the lady most deserving her name and blood: Lady Mary Wroth.

			Madam,

			In the age of sacrifices, the truth of religion was not in the greatness and fat of the offerings, but in the devotion and zeal of the sacrificers: else what could a handle of gums have done in the sight of a hecatomb? or how might I appear at this altar, except with those affections that no less love the light and witness, than they have the conscience of your virtue? If what I offer bear an acceptable odour, and hold the first strength, it is your value of it, which remembers where, when, and to whom it was kindled. Otherwise, as the times are, there comes rarely forth that thing so full of authority or example, but by assiduity and custom grows less, and loses. This, yet, safe in your judgment (which is a Sidney’s) is forbidden to speak more, lest it talk or look like one of the ambitious faces of the time, who, the more they paint, are the less themselves.

			 				Your ladyship’s true honourer,

				Ben Jonson





		 			To the Reader

			If thou beest more, thou art an understander, and then I trust thee. If thou art one that takest up, and but a pretender, beware of what hands thou receivest thy commodity; for thou wert never more fair in the way to be cozened, than in this age, in poetry, especially in plays: wherein, now the concupiscence of dances and of antics so reigneth, as to run away from nature, and be afraid of her, is the only point of art that tickles the spectators. But how out of purpose, and place, do I name art? When the professors are grown so obstinate contemners of it, and presumers on their own naturals, as they are deriders of all diligence that way, and, by simple mocking at the terms, when they understand not the things, think to get off wittily with their ignorance. Nay, they are esteemed the more learned, and sufficient for this, by the many, through their excellent vice of judgment. For they commend writers, as they do fencers or wrestlers; who if they come in robustuously, and put for it with a great deal of violence, are received for the braver fellows: when many times their own rudeness is the cause of their disgrace, and a little touch of their adversary gives all that boisterous force the foil. I deny not, but that these men, who always seek to do more than enough, may some time happen on some thing that is good, and great; but very seldom; and when it comes it doth not recompense the rest of their ill. It sticks out, perhaps, and is more eminent, because all is sordid and vile about it: as lights are more discerned in a thick darkness, than a faint shadow. I speak not this, out of a hope to do good to any man against his will; for I know, if it were put to the question of theirs and mine, the worse would find more suffrages: because the most favour common errors. But I give thee this warning, that there is a great difference between those, that, to gain the opinion of copy, utter all they can, however unfitly; and those that use election and a mean. For it is only the disease of the unskilful, to think rude things greater than polished; or scattered more numerous than composed.





				The Alchemist





Argument


			 				The sickness hot, a master quit, for fear,

				 				His house in town, and left one servant there;

				 				Ease him corrupted, and gave means to know



			 				A Cheater, and his punk; who now brought low,

				 				Leaving their narrow practice, were become

				 				Cozeners at large; and only wanting some

				 				House to set up, with him they here contract,

				 				Each for a share, and all begin to act.

				 				Much company they draw, and much abuse,

				 				In casting figures, telling fortunes, news,

				 				Selling of flies, flat bawdry with the stone,

				 				Till it, and they, and all in fume are gone.





Prologue


			 				Fortune, that favours fools, these two short hours,

				 				We wish away, both for your sakes and ours,

				 				Judging spectators; and desire, in place,

				 				To the author justice, to ourselves but grace.

				 				Our scene is London, ’cause we would make known,

				 				No country’s mirth is better than our own:

				 				No clime breeds better matter for your whore,

				 				Bawd, squire, impostor, many persons more,

				 				Whose manners, now called humours, feed the stage;

				 				And which have still been subject for the rage

				 				Or spleen of comic writers. Though this pen

				 				Did never aim to grieve, but better men;

				 				Howe’er the age he lives in doth endure

				 				The vices that she breeds, above their cure.

				 				But when the wholesome remedies are sweet,

				 				And in their working gain and profit meet,

				 				He hopes to find no spirit so much diseased,

				 				But will with such fair correctives be pleased:

				 				For here he doth not fear who can apply.

				 				If there be any that will sit so nigh

				 				Unto the stream, to look what it doth run,

				 				They shall find things, they’d think or wish were done;

				 				They are so natural follies, but so shown,

				 				As even the doers may see, and yet not own.





Act I




Scene I


				A room in Lovewit’s house.

				 					 						 Face 						 							 								Believ’t, I will.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Thy worst. I fart at thee.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Have you your wits? Why, gentlemen! For love⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sirrah, I’ll strip you⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What to do? Lick figs

								 								Out at my⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Rogue, rogue!⁠—out of all your sleights.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Nay, look ye, sovereign, general, are you madmen?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, let the wild sheep loose. I’ll gum your silks

								 								With good strong water, an you come.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Will you have

								 								The neighbours hear you? Will you betray all?

								 								Hark! I hear somebody.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sirrah⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I shall mar

								 								All that the tailor has made, if you approach.





					 						 Face 						 							 								You most notorious whelp, you insolent slave,

								 								Dare you do this?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, faith; yes, faith.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, who

								 								Am I, my mongrel? Who am I?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I’ll tell you,

								 								Since you know not yourself.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Speak lower, rogue.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, you were once (time’s not long past) the good,

								 								Honest, plain, livery-three-pound-thrum, that kept

								 								Your master’s worship’s house here in the Friars,

								 								For the vacations⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Will you be so loud?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Since, by my means, translated Suburb-Captain.





					 						 Face 						 							 								By your means, Doctor Dog!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Within man’s memory,

								 								All this I speak of.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, I pray you, have I

								 								Been countenanced by you, or you by me?

								 								Do but collect, sir, where I met you first.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I do not hear well.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Not of this, I think it.

								 								But I shall put you in mind, sir;⁠—at Pie-corner,

								 								Taking your meal of steam in, from cooks’ stalls,

								 								Where, like the father of hunger, you did walk

								 								Piteously costive, with your pinched-horn-nose,

								 								And your complexion of the Roman wash,

								 								Stuck full of black and melancholic worms,

								 								Like powder corns shot at the artillery-yard.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I wish you could advance your voice a little.





					 						 Face 						 							 								When you went pinned up in the several rags

								 								You had raked and picked from dunghills, before day;

								 								Your feet in mouldy slippers, for your kibes;

								 								A felt of rug, and a thin threaden cloak,

								 								That scarce would cover your no buttocks⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								So, sir!





					 						 Face 						 							 								When all your alchemy, and your algebra,

								 								Your minerals, vegetals, and animals,

								 								Your conjuring, cozening, and your dozen of trades,

								 								Could not relieve your corps with so much linen

								 								Would make you tinder, but to see a fire;

								 								I gave you countenance, credit for your coals,

								 								Your stills, your glasses, your materials;

								 								Built you a furnace, drew you customers,

								 								Advanced all your black arts; lent you, beside,

								 								A house to practise in⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Your master’s house!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Where you have studied the more thriving skill

								 								Of bawdry since.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, in your master’s house.

								 								You and the rats here kept possession.

								 								Make it not strange. I know you were one could keep

								 								The buttery-hatch still locked, and save the chippings,

								 								Sell the dole beer to aqua-vitae men,

								 								The which, together with your Christmas vails

								 								At post-and-pair, your letting out of counters,

								 								Made you a pretty stock, some twenty marks,

								 								And gave you credit to converse with cobwebs,

								 								Here, since your mistress’ death hath broke up house.





					 						 Face 						 							 								You might talk softlier, rascal.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No, you scarab,

								 								I’ll thunder you in pieces: I will teach you

								 								How to beware to tempt a Fury again,

								 								That carries tempest in his hand and voice.





					 						 Face 						 							 								The place has made you valiant.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No, your clothes.⁠—

								 								Thou vermin, have I ta’en thee out of dung,

								 								So poor, so wretched, when no living thing

								 								Would keep thee company, but a spider, or worse?

								 								Raised thee from brooms, and dust, and watering-pots,

								 								Sublimed thee, and exalted thee, and fixed thee

								 								In the third region, called our state of grace?

								 								Wrought thee to spirit, to quintessence, with pains

								 								Would twice have won me the philosopher’s work?

								 								Put thee in words and fashion, made thee fit

								 								For more than ordinary fellowships?

								 								Given thee thy oaths, thy quarrelling dimensions,

								 								Thy rules to cheat at horse-race, cock-pit, cards,

								 								Dice, or whatever gallant tincture else?

								 								Made thee a second in mine own great art?

								 								And have I this for thanks! Do you rebel,

								 								Do you fly out in the projection?

								 								Would you be gone now?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Gentlemen, what mean you?

								 								Will you mar all?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Slave, thou hadst had no name⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Will you undo yourselves with civil war?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Never been known, past equi clibanum,

								 								The heat of horse-dung, under ground, in cellars,

								 								Or an alehouse darker than deaf John’s; been lost

								 								To all mankind, but laundresses and tapsters,

								 								Had not I been.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Do you know who hears you, Sovereign?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sirrah⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Nay, General, I thought you were civil.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I shall turn desperate, if you grow thus loud.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And hang thyself, I care not.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Hang thee, collier,

								 								And all thy pots, and pans, in picture, I will,

								 								Since thou hast moved me⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								O, this will o’erthrow all.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Write thee up bawd in Paul’s, have all thy tricks

								 								Of cozening with a hollow coal, dust, scrapings,

								 								Searching for things lost, with a sieve and sheers,

								 								Erecting figures in your rows of houses,

								 								And taking in of shadows with a glass,

								 								Told in red letters; and a face cut for thee,

								 								Worse than Gamaliel Ratsey’s.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Are you sound?

								 								Have you your senses, masters?





					 						 Face 						 							 								I will have

								 								A book, but barely reckoning thy impostures,

								 								Shall prove a true philosopher’s stone to printers.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Away, you trencher-rascal!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Out, you dog-leech!

								 								The vomit of all prisons⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Will you be

								 								Your own destructions, gentlemen?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Still spewed out

								 								For lying too heavy on the basket.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Cheater!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Bawd!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Cowherd!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Conjurer!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Cutpurse!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Witch!





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								O me!

								 								We are ruined, lost! Have you no more regard

								 								To your reputations? Where’s your judgment? ’Slight,

								 								Have yet some care of me, of your republic⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Away, this brach! I’ll bring thee, rogue, within

								 								The statute of sorcery, tricesimo tertio

								 								Of Harry the Eighth: ay, and perhaps thy neck

								 								Within a noose, for laundering gold and barbing it.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								 									Snatches Face’s sword.

								 								You’ll bring your head within a cockscomb, will you?

								 								And you, sir, with your menstrue⁠—

								 								 									Dashes Subtle’s vial out of his hand.

								 								Gather it up.⁠—

								 								’Sdeath, you abominable pair of stinkards,

								 								Leave off your barking, and grow one again,

								 								Or, by the light that shines, I’ll cut your throats.

								 								I’ll not be made a prey unto the marshal,

								 								For ne’er a snarling dog-bolt of you both.

								 								Have you together cozened all this while,

								 								And all the world, and shall it now be said,

								 								You’ve made most courteous shift to cozen yourselves?

								 								 									To Face.

								 								You will accuse him! You will “bring him in

								 								Within the statute!” Who shall take your word?

								 								A whoreson, upstart, apocryphal Captain,

								 								Whom not a Puritan in Blackfriars will trust

								 								So much as for a feather:

								 								 									To Subtle.

								 								and you, too,

								 								Will give the cause, forsooth! You will insult,

								 								And claim a primacy in the divisions!

								 								You must be chief! As if you only had

								 								The powder to project with, and the work

								 								Were not begun out of equality?

								 								The venture tripartite? All things in common?

								 								Without priority? ’Sdeath! You perpetual curs,

								 								Fall to your couples again, and cozen kindly,

								 								And heartily, and lovingly, as you should,

								 								And lose not the beginning of a term,

								 								Or, by this hand, I shall grow factious too,

								 								And take my part, and quit you.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Tis his fault;

								 								He ever murmurs, and objects his pains,

								 								And says, the weight of all lies upon him.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, so it does.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								How does it? Do not we

								 								Sustain our parts?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, but they are not equal.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Why, if your part exceed today, I hope

								 								Ours may, tomorrow match it.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ay, they may.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								May, murmuring mastiff! Ay, and do. Death on me!

								 								Help me to throttle him.





					 						 						 							Seizes Subtle by the throat.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Dorothy! Mistress Dorothy!

								 								’Ods precious, I’ll do anything. What do you mean?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Because o’ your fermentation and cibation?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Not I, by heaven⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Your Sol and Luna

								 								 									To Face.

								 								—help me.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Would I were hanged then? I’ll conform myself.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Will you, sir? Do so then, and quickly: swear.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What should I swear?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								To leave your faction, sir,

								 								And labour kindly in the common work.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Let me not breathe if I meant aught beside.

								 								I only used those speeches as a spur

								 								To him.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								I hope we need no spurs, sir. Do we?





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Slid, prove today, who shall shark best.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Agreed.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yes, and work close and friendly.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Slight, the knot

								 								Shall grow the stronger for this breach, with me.





					 						 						 							They shake hands.

					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Why, so, my good baboons! Shall we go make

								 								A sort of sober, scurvy, precise neighbours,

								 								That scarce have smiled twice since the king came in,

								 								A feast of laughter at our follies? Rascals,

								 								Would run themselves from breath, to see me ride,

								 								Or you t’ have but a hole to thrust your heads in,

								 								For which you should pay ear-rent? No, agree.

								 								And may Don Provost ride a feasting long,

								 								In his old velvet jerkin and stained scarfs,

								 								My noble Sovereign, and worthy General,

								 								Ere we contribute a new crewel garter

								 								To his most worsted worship.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Royal Dol!

								 								Spoken like Claridiana, and thyself.





					 						 Face 						 							 								For which at supper, thou shalt sit in triumph,

								 								And not be styled Dol Common, but Dol Proper,

								 								Dol Singular: the longest cut at night,

								 								Shall draw thee for his Dol Particular.





					 						 						 							Bell rings without.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Who’s that? One rings. To the window, Dol:





					 						 						 Exit Dol.

					 						 						 							 								—pray heaven,

								 								The master do not trouble us this quarter.





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, fear not him. While there dies one a week

								 								O’ the plague, he’s safe, from thinking toward London.

								 								Beside, he’s busy at his hop-yards now;

								 								I had a letter from him. If he do,

								 								He’ll send such word, for airing of the house,

								 								As you shall have sufficient time to quit it:

								 								Though we break up a fortnight, ’tis no matter.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Dol.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Who is it, Dol?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								A fine young quodling.





					 						 Face 						 							 								O,

								 								My lawyer’s clerk, I lighted on last night,

								 								In Holborn, at the Dagger. He would have

								 								(I told you of him) a familiar,

								 								To rifle with at horses, and win cups.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								O, let him in.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Stay. Who shall do’t?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Get you

								 								Your robes on: I will meet him as going out.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								And what shall I do?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Not be seen; away!





					 						 						 Exit Dol.

					 						 						 							 								Seem you very reserved.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Enough.





					 						 						 Exit.

					 						 Face 						 							 								 									Aloud and retiring.

								 								God be wi’ you, sir,

								 								I pray you let him know that I was here:

								 								His name is Dapper. I would gladly have stayed, but⁠—





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Within. Captain, I am here.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Who’s that?⁠—He’s come, I think, Doctor.





					 						 						 Enter Dapper.

					 						 						 Good faith, sir, I was going away.

					 						 Dapper 						 							 								In truth

								 								I am very sorry, Captain.





					 						 Face 						 							 								But I thought

								 								Sure I should meet you.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Ay, I am very glad.

								 								I had a scurvy writ or two to make,

								 								And I had lent my watch last night to one

								 								That dines today at the sheriff’s, and so was robbed

								 								Of my past-time.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Subtle in his velvet cap and gown.

					 						 						 							 								Is this the cunning-man?





					 						 Face 						 							 								This is his worship.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Is he a Doctor?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								And have you broke with him, Captain?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								And how?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Faith, he does make the matter, sir, so dainty

								 								I know not what to say.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Not so, good Captain.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Would I were fairly rid of it, believe me.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Nay, now you grieve me, sir. Why should you wish so?

								 								I dare assure you, I’ll not be ungrateful.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I cannot think you will, sir. But the law

								 								Is such a thing⁠—and then he says, Read’s matter

								 								Falling so lately.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Read! He was an ass,

								 								And dealt, sir, with a fool.





					 						 Face 						 							 								It was a clerk, sir.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								A clerk!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, hear me, sir. You know the law

								 								Better, I think⁠—





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I should, sir, and the danger:

								 								You know, I showed the statute to you.





					 						 Face 						 							 								You did so.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								And will I tell then! By this hand of flesh,

								 								Would it might never write good court-hand more,

								 								If I discover. What do you think of me,

								 								That I am a chiaus?





					 						 Face 						 							 								What’s that?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								The Turk was here.

								 								As one would say, do you think I am a Turk?





					 						 Face 						 							 								I’ll tell the Doctor so.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Do, good sweet Captain.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Come, noble Doctor, pray thee let’s prevail;

								 								This is the gentleman, and he is no chiaus.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Captain, I have returned you all my answer.

								 								I would do much, sir, for your love⁠—But this

								 								I neither may, nor can.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Tut, do not say so.

								 								You deal now with a noble fellow, Doctor,

								 								One that will thank you richly; and he is no chiaus:

								 								Let that, sir, move you.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Pray you, forbear⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								He has

								 								Four angels here.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You do me wrong, good sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Doctor, wherein? To tempt you with these spirits?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								To tempt my art and love, sir, to my peril.

								 								Fore heaven, I scarce can think you are my friend,

								 								That so would draw me to apparent danger.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I draw you! A horse draw you, and a halter,

								 								You, and your flies together⁠—





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Nay, good Captain.





					 						 Face 						 							 								That know no difference of men.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Good words, sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good deeds, sir, Doctor Dogs-meat. ’Slight, I bring you

								 								No cheating Clim o’ the Cloughs or Claribels,

								 								That look as big as five-and-fifty, and flush;

								 								And spit out secrets like hot custard⁠—





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Captain!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nor any melancholic under-scribe,

								 								Shall tell the vicar; but a special gentle,

								 								That is the heir to forty marks a year,

								 								Consorts with the small poets of the time,

								 								Is the sole hope of his old grandmother;

								 								That knows the law, and writes you six fair hands,

								 								Is a fine clerk, and has his cyphering perfect.

								 								Will take his oath o’ the Greek Testament,

								 								If need be, in his pocket; and can court

								 								His mistress out of Ovid.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Nay, dear Captain⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Did you not tell me so?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Yes; but I’d have you

								 								Use master Doctor with some more respect.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Hang him, proud stag, with his broad velvet head!⁠—

								 								But for your sake, I’d choke, ere I would change

								 								An article of breath with such a puckfist:

								 								Come, let’s be gone.





					 						 						 Going.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Pray you let me speak with you.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								His worship calls you, Captain.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I am sorry

								 								I e’er embarked myself in such a business.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Nay, good sir; he did call you.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Will he take then?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								First, hear me⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Not a syllable, ’less you take.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Pray you, sir⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Upon no terms but an assumpsit.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Your humour must be law.

								 								 									He takes the four angels.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why now, sir, talk.

								 								Now I dare hear you with mine honour. Speak.

								 								So may this gentleman too.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, sir⁠—

								 								 									Offering to whisper Face.





					 						 Face 						 							 								No whispering.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Fore heaven, you do not apprehend the loss

								 								You do yourself in this.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Wherein? For what?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Marry, to be so importunate for one,

								 								That, when he has it, will undo you all:

								 								He’ll win up all the money in the town.





					 						 Face 						 							 								How!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, and blow up gamester after gamester,

								 								As they do crackers in a puppet-play.

								 								If I do give him a familiar,

								 								Give you him all you play for; never set him:

								 								For he will have it.





					 						 Face 						 							 								You are mistaken, Doctor.

								 								Why he does ask one but for cups and horses,

								 								A rifling fly; none of your great familiars.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Yes, Captain, I would have it for all games.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I told you so.





					 						 Face 						 							 								 									Taking Dapper aside.

								 								’Slight, that is a new business!

								 								I understood you, a tame bird, to fly

								 								Twice in a term, or so, on Friday nights,

								 								When you had left the office, for a nag

								 								Of forty or fifty shillings.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Ay, ’tis true, sir;

								 								But I do think now I shall leave the law,

								 								And therefore⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, this changes quite the case.

								 								Do you think that I dare move him?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								If you please, sir;

								 								All’s one to him, I see.





					 						 Face 						 							 								What! For that money?

								 								I cannot with my conscience; nor should you

								 								Make the request, methinks.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								No, sir, I mean

								 								To add consideration.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why then, sir,

								 								I’ll try.⁠—

								 								 									Goes to Subtle.

								 								Say that it were for all games, Doctor.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I say then, not a mouth shall eat for him

								 								At any ordinary, but on the score,

								 								That is a gaming mouth, conceive me.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Indeed!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								He’ll draw you all the treasure of the realm,

								 								If it be set him.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Speak you this from art?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ay, sir, and reason too, the ground of art.

								 								He is of the only best complexion,

								 								The Queen of Fairy loves.





					 						 Face 						 							 								What! Is he?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Peace.

								 								He’ll overhear you. Sir, should she but see him⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								What?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Do not you tell him.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Will he win at cards too?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								The spirits of dead Holland, living Isaac,

								 								You’d swear, were in him; such a vigorous luck

								 								As cannot be resisted. ’Slight, he’ll put

								 								Six of your gallants to a cloak, indeed.





					 						 Face 						 							 								A strange success, that some man shall be born to.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								He hears you, man⁠—





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Sir, I’ll not be ingrateful.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Faith, I have confidence in his good nature:

								 								You hear, he says he will not be ingrateful.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, as you please; my venture follows yours.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Troth, do it, Doctor; think him trusty, and make him.

								 								He may make us both happy in an hour;

								 								Win some five thousand pound, and send us two on’t.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Believe it, and I will, sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And you shall, sir.

								 								 									Takes him aside.

								 								You have heard all?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								No, what was’t? Nothing, I, sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nothing!





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								A little, sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Well, a rare star

								 								Reigned at your birth.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								At mine, sir! No.





					 						 Face 						 							 								The Doctor

								 								Swears that you are⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Nay, Captain, you’ll tell all now.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Allied to the Queen of Fairy.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Who! That I am?

								 								Believe it, no such matter⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, and that

								 								You were born with a cawl on your head.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Who says so?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Come,

								 								You know it well enough, though you dissemble it.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I’fac, I do not; you are mistaken.





					 						 Face 						 							 								How!

								 								Swear by your fac, and in a thing so known

								 								Unto the Doctor? How shall we, sir, trust you

								 								In the other matter? Can we ever think,

								 								When you have won five or six thousand pound,

								 								You’ll send us shares in’t, by this rate?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								By Jove, sir,

								 								I’ll win ten thousand pound, and send you half.

								 								I’fac’s no oath.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No, no, he did but jest.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Go to. Go thank the Doctor: he’s your friend,

								 								To take it so.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I thank his worship.





					 						 Face 						 							 								So!

								 								Another angel.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Must I?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Must you! ’Slight,

								 								What else is thanks? Will you be trivial?⁠—Doctor,

								 								 									Dapper gives him the money.

								 								When must he come for his familiar?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Shall I not have it with me?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, good sir!

								 								There must a world of ceremonies pass;

								 								You must be bathed and fumigated first:

								 								Besides the Queen of Fairy does not rise

								 								Till it be noon.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Not, if she danced, tonight.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And she must bless it.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Did you never see

								 								Her royal Grace yet?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Whom?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Your aunt of Fairy?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Not since she kissed him in the cradle, Captain;

								 								I can resolve you that.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Well, see her Grace,

								 								Whate’er it cost you, for a thing that I know.

								 								It will be somewhat hard to compass; but

								 								However, see her. You are made, believe it,

								 								If you can see her. Her Grace is a lone woman,

								 								And very rich; and if she take a fancy,

								 								She will do strange things. See her, at any hand.

								 								’Slid, she may hap to leave you all she has:

								 								It is the Doctor’s fear.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								How will’t be done, then?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Let me alone, take you no thought. Do you

								 								But say to me, Captain, I’ll see her Grace.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								“Captain, I’ll see her Grace.”





					 						 Face 						 							 								Enough.





					 						 						 Knocking within.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Who’s there?

								 								Anon.

								 								 									Aside to Face.

								 								—Conduct him forth by the back way.⁠—

								 								Sir, against one o’clock prepare yourself;

								 								Till when you must be fasting; only take

								 								Three drops of vinegar in at your nose,

								 								Two at your mouth, and one at either ear;

								 								Then bathe your fingers’ ends and wash your eyes,

								 								To sharpen your five senses, and cry “hum”

								 								Thrice, and then “buz” as often; and then come.





					 						 						 Exit.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Can you remember this?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I warrant you.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Well then, away. It is but your bestowing

								 								Some twenty nobles ’mong her Grace’s servants,

								 								And put on a clean shirt: you do not know

								 								What grace her Grace may do you in clean linen.





					 						 						 Exeunt Face and Dapper.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Within. Come in! Good wives, I pray you forbear me now;

								 								Troth I can do you no good till afternoon⁠—





					 						 						 Re-enters, followed by Drugger.

					 						 						 							 								What is your name, say you? Abel Drugger?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								A seller of tobacco?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Umph!

								 								Free of the grocers?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Ay, and’t please you.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Well⁠—

								 								Your business, Abel?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								This, and’t please your worship;

								 								I am a young beginner, and am building

								 								Of a new shop, and’t like your worship, just

								 								At corner of a street:⁠—Here is the plot on’t⁠—

								 								And I would know by art, sir, of your worship,

								 								Which way I should make my door, by necromancy,

								 								And where my shelves; and which should be for boxes,

								 								And which for pots. I would be glad to thrive, sir:

								 								And I was wished to your worship by a gentleman,

								 								One Captain Face, that says you know men’s planets,

								 								And their good angels, and their bad.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I do,

								 								If I do see them⁠—





					 						 						 Re-enter Face.

					 						 Face 						 							 								What! My honest Abel?

								 								Though art well met here.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Troth, sir, I was speaking,

								 								Just as your worship came here, of your worship:

								 								I pray you speak for me to Master Doctor.





					 						 Face 						 							 								He shall do anything.⁠—Doctor, do you hear?

								 								This is my friend, Abel, an honest fellow;

								 								He lets me have good tobacco, and he does not

								 								Sophisticate it with sack-lees or oil,

								 								Nor washes it in muscadel and grains,

								 								Nor buries it in gravel, under ground,

								 								Wrapped up in greasy leather, or pissed clouts:

								 								But keeps it in fine lily pots, that, opened,

								 								Smell like conserve of roses, or French beans.

								 								He has his maple block, his silver tongs,

								 								Winchester pipes, and fire of Juniper:

								 								A neat, spruce, honest fellow, and no goldsmith.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								He is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Already, sir, have you found it? Lo thee, Abel!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And in right way toward riches⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								This summer

								 								He will be of the clothing of his company,

								 								And next spring called to the scarlet; spend what he can.





					 						 Face 						 							 								What, and so little beard?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Sir, you must think,

								 								He may have a receipt to make hair come:

								 								But he’ll be wise, preserve his youth, and fine for’t;

								 								His fortune looks for him another way.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Slid, Doctor, how canst thou know this so soon?

								 								I am amused at that!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								By a rule, Captain,

								 								In metoposcopy, which I do work by;

								 								A certain star in the forehead, which you see not.

								 								Your chestnut or your olive-coloured face

								 								Does never fail: and your long ear doth promise.

								 								I knew’t by certain spots, too, in his teeth,

								 								And on the nail of his mercurial finger.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Which finger’s that?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								His little finger. Look.

								 								You were born upon a Wednesday?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, indeed, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								The thumb, in chiromancy, we give Venus;

								 								The forefinger, to Jove; the midst, to Saturn;

								 								The ring, to Sol; the least, to Mercury,

								 								Who was the lord, sir, of his horoscope,

								 								His house of life being Libra; which foreshowed,

								 								He should be a merchant, and should trade with balance.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, this is strange! Is it not, honest Nab?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								There is a ship now, coming from Ormus,

								 								That shall yield him such a commodity

								 								Of drugs

								 								 									Pointing to the plan.

								 								—This is the west, and this the south?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And those are your two sides?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Ay, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Make me your door, then, south; your broad side, west:

								 								And on the east side of your shop, aloft,

								 								Write Mathlai, Tarmiel, and Baraborat;

								 								Upon the north part, Rael, Velel, Thiel.

								 								They are the names of those mercurial spirits,

								 								That do fright flies from boxes.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And

								 								Beneath your threshold, bury me a loadstone

								 								To draw in gallants that wear spurs: the rest,

								 								They’ll seem to follow.





					 						 Face 						 							 								That’s a secret, Nab!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And, on your stall, a puppet, with a vice

								 								And a court-fucus to call city-dames:

								 								You shall deal much with minerals.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Sir, I have.

								 								At home, already⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ay, I know you have arsenic,

								 								Vitriol, sal-tartar, argaile, alkali,

								 								Cinoper: I know all.⁠—This fellow, Captain,

								 								Will come, in time, to be a great distiller,

								 								And give a say⁠—I will not say directly,

								 								But very fair⁠—at the philosopher’s stone.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, how now, Abel! Is this true?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								 									Aside to Face.

								 								Good Captain,

								 								What must I give?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, I’ll not counsel thee.

								 								Thou hear’st what wealth (he says, spend what thou canst,)

								 								Thou’rt like to come to.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								I would gi’ him a crown.





					 						 Face 						 							 								A crown! And toward such a fortune? Heart,

								 								Thou shalt rather gi’ him thy shop. No gold about thee?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, I have a portague, I have kept this half-year.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Out on thee, Nab! ’Slight, there was such an offer⁠—

								 								Shalt keep’t no longer, I’ll give’t him for thee. Doctor,

								 								Nab prays your worship to drink this, and swears

								 								He will appear more grateful, as your skill

								 								Does raise him in the world.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								I would entreat

								 								Another favour of his worship.





					 						 Face 						 							 								What is’t, Nab?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								But to look over, sir, my almanack,

								 								And cross out my ill-days, that I may neither

								 								Bargain, nor trust upon them.





					 						 Face 						 							 								That he shall, Nab:

								 								Leave it, it shall be done, ’gainst afternoon.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And a direction for his shelves.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Now, Nab,

								 								Art thou well pleased, Nab?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								’Thank, sir, both your worships.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Away.





					 						 						 Exit Drugger.

					 						 						 							 								Why, now, you smoaky persecutor of nature!

								 								Now do you see, that something’s to be done,

								 								Beside your beech-coal, and your corsive waters,

								 								Your crosslets, crucibles, and cucurbites?

								 								You must have stuff brought home to you, to work on:

								 								And yet you think, I am at no expense

								 								In searching out these veins, then following them,

								 								Then trying them out. ’Fore God, my intelligence

								 								Costs me more money, than my share oft comes to,

								 								In these rare works.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You are pleasant, sir.





					 						 						 Re-enter Dol.

					 						 						 							 								—How now!

								 								What says my dainty Dolkin?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yonder fishwife

								 								Will not away. And there’s your giantess,

								 								The bawd of Lambeth.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Heart, I cannot speak with them.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Not afore night, I have told them in a voice,

								 								Thorough the trunk, like one of your familiars.

								 								But I have spied sir Epicure Mammon⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Where?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Coming along, at far end of the lane,

								 								Slow of his feet, but earnest of his tongue

								 								To one that’s with him.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Face, go you and shift.





					 						 						 Exit Face.

					 						 						 							 								Dol, you must presently make ready, too.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Why, what’s the matter?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, I did look for him

								 								With the sun’s rising: ’marvel he could sleep,

								 								This is the day I am to perfect for him

								 								The magisterium, our great work, the stone;

								 								And yield it, made, into his hands: of which

								 								He has, this month, talked as he were possessed.

								 								And now he’s dealing pieces on’t away.⁠—

								 								Methinks I see him entering ordinaries,

								 								Dispensing for the pox, and plaguey houses,

								 								Reaching his dose, walking Moorfields for lepers,

								 								And offering citizens’ wives pomander-bracelets,

								 								As his preservative, made of the elixir;

								 								Searching the spittal, to make old bawds young;

								 								And the highways, for beggars, to make rich.

								 								I see no end of his labours. He will make

								 								Nature ashamed of her long sleep: when art,

								 								Who’s but a step-dame, shall do more than she,

								 								In her best love to mankind, ever could:

								 								If his dream lasts, he’ll turn the age to gold.





					 						 						 Exeunt.





Act II




Scene I


				An outer room in Lovewit’s house.

				 					 						 						 Enter Sir Epicure Mammon and Surly.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Come on, sir. Now, you set your foot on shore

								 								In Novo Orbe; here’s the rich Peru:

								 								And there within, sir, are the golden mines,

								 								Great Solomon’s Ophir! He was sailing to’t,

								 								Three years, but we have reached it in ten months.

								 								This is the day, wherein, to all my friends,

								 								I will pronounce the happy word, Be Rich;

								 								This day you shall be spectatissimi.

								 								You shall no more deal with the hollow dye,

								 								Or the frail card. No more be at charge of keeping

								 								The livery-punk for the young heir, that must

								 								Seal, at all hours, in his shirt: no more,

								 								If he deny, have him beaten to’t, as he is

								 								That brings him the commodity. No more

								 								Shall thirst of satin, or the covetous hunger

								 								Of velvet entrails for a rude-spun cloak,

								 								To be displayed at Madam Augusta’s, make

								 								The sons of Sword and Hazard fall before

								 								The golden calf, and on their knees, whole nights

								 								Commit idolatry with wine and trumpets:

								 								Or go a feasting after drum and ensign.

								 								No more of this. You shall start up young viceroys,

								 								And have your punks, and punketees, my Surly.

								 								And unto thee I speak it first, Be Rich.

								 								Where is my Subtle, there? Within, ho!





					 						 Face 						 							 								 									Within.

								 								Sir,

								 								He’ll come to you by and by.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								That is his firedrake,

								 								His Lungs, his Zephyrus, he that puffs his coals,

								 								Till he firk nature up, in her own centre.

								 								You are not faithful, sir. This night, I’ll change

								 								All that is metal, in my house, to gold:

								 								And, early in the morning, will I send

								 								To all the plumbers and the pewterers,

								 								And by their tin and lead up; and to Lothbury

								 								For all the copper.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								What, and turn that too?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Yes, and I’ll purchase Devonshire and Cornwall,

								 								And make them perfect Indies! You admire now?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								No, faith.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								But when you see th’ effects of the Great Medicine,

								 								Of which one part projected on a hundred

								 								Of Mercury, or Venus, or the moon,

								 								Shall turn it to as many of the sun;

								 								Nay, to a thousand, so ad infinitum:

								 								You will believe me.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Yes, when I see’t, I will.

								 								But if my eyes do cozen me so, and I

								 								Giving them no occasion, sure I’ll have

								 								A whore, shall piss them out next day.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Ha! Why?

								 								Do you think I fable with you? I assure you,

								 								He that has once the flower of the sun,

								 								The perfect ruby, which we call elixir,

								 								Not only can do that, but, by its virtue,

								 								Can confer honour, love, respect, long life;

								 								Give safety, valour, yea, and victory,

								 								To whom he will. In eight and twenty days,

								 								I’ll make an old man of fourscore, a child.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								No doubt; he’s that already.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Nay, I mean,

								 								Restore his years, renew him, like an eagle,

								 								To the fifth age; make him get sons and daughters,

								 								Young giants; as our philosophers have done,

								 								The ancient patriarchs, afore the flood,

								 								But taking, once a week, on a knife’s point,

								 								The quantity of a grain of mustard of it;

								 								Become stout Marses, and beget young Cupids.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								The decayed Vestals of Pict-hatch would thank you,

								 								That keep the fire alive, there.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								’Tis the secret

								 								Of nature naturised ’gainst all infections,

								 								Cures all diseases coming of all causes;

								 								A month’s grief in a day, a year’s in twelve;

								 								And, of what age soever, in a month:

								 								Past all the doses of your drugging doctors.

								 								I’ll undertake, withal, to fright the plague

								 								Out of the kingdom in three months.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								And I’ll

								 								Be bound, the players shall sing your praises, then,

								 								Without their poets.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Sir, I’ll do’t. Meantime,

								 								I’ll give away so much unto my man,

								 								Shall serve the whole city, with preservative

								 								Weekly; each house his dose, and at the rate⁠—





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								As he that built the waterwork, does with water?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								You are incredulous.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Faith I have a humour,

								 								I would not willingly be gulled. Your stone

								 								Cannot transmute me.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Pertinax, [my] Surly,

								 								Will you believe antiquity? Records?

								 								I’ll show you a book where Moses and his sister,

								 								And Solomon have written of the art;

								 								Ay, and a treatise penned by Adam⁠—





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								How!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Of the philosopher’s stone, and in High Dutch.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Did Adam write, sir, in High Dutch?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								He did;

								 								Which proves it was the primitive tongue.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								What paper?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								On cedar board.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								O that, indeed, they say,

								 								Will last ’gainst worms.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								’Tis like your Irish wood,

								 								’Gainst cobwebs. I have a piece of Jason’s fleece, too,

								 								Which was no other than a book of alchemy,

								 								Writ in large sheepskin, a good fat ram-vellum.

								 								Such was Pythagoras’ thigh, Pandora’s tub,

								 								And, all that fable of Medea’s charms,

								 								The manner of our work; the bulls, our furnace,

								 								Still breathing fire; our argent-vive, the dragon:

								 								The dragon’s teeth, mercury sublimate,

								 								That keeps the whiteness, hardness, and the biting;

								 								And they are gathered into Jason’s helm,

								 								The alembic, and then sowed in Mars his field,

								 								And thence sublimed so often, till they’re fixed.

								 								Both this, the Hesperian garden, Cadmus’ story,

								 								Jove’s shower, the boon of Midas, Argus’ eyes,

								 								Boccace his Demogorgon, thousands more,

								 								All abstract riddles of our stone.





					 						 						 Enter Face, as a servant.

					 						 						 							 								—How now!

								 								Do we succeed? Is our day come? And holds it?





					 						 Face 						 							 								The evening will set red upon you, sir;

								 								You have colour for it, crimson: the red ferment

								 								Has done his office; three hours hence prepare you

								 								To see projection.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Pertinax, my Surly.

								 								Again I say to thee, aloud, Be rich.

								 								This day, thou shalt have ingots; and tomorrow,

								 								Give lords th’ affront.⁠—Is it, my Zephyrus, right?

								 								Blushes the bolt’s head?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Like a wench with child, sir,

								 								That were but now discovered to her master.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Excellent witty Lungs!⁠—my only care

								 								Where to get stuff enough now, to project on;

								 								This town will not half serve me.





					 						 Face 						 							 								No, sir! Buy

								 								The covering off o’ churches.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								That’s true.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes.

								 								Let them stand bare, as do their auditory;

								 								Or cap them, new, with shingles.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								No, good thatch:

								 								Thatch will lie light upon the rafters, Lungs.⁠—

								 								Lungs, I will manumit thee from the furnace;

								 								I will restore thee thy complexion, Puffe,

								 								Lost in the embers; and repair this brain,

								 								Hurt with the fume o’ the metals.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I have blown, sir,

								 								Hard for your worship; thrown by many a coal,

								 								When ’twas not beech; weighed those I put in, just,

								 								To keep your heat still even; these bleared eyes

								 								Have waked to read your several colours, sir,

								 								Of the pale citron, the green lion, the crow,

								 								The peacock’s tail, the plumed swan.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								And, lastly,

								 								Thou hast descryed the flower, the sanguis agni?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Where’s master?





					 						 Face 						 							 								At his prayers, sir, he;

								 								Good man, he’s doing his devotions

								 								For the success.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Lungs, I will set a period

								 								To all thy labours; thou shalt be the master

								 								Of my seraglio.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								But do you hear?

								 								I’ll geld you, Lungs.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								For I do mean

								 								To have a list of wives and concubines,

								 								Equal with Solomon, who had the stone

								 								Alike with me; and I will make me a back

								 								With the elixir, that shall be as tough

								 								As Hercules, to encounter fifty a night.⁠—

								 								Thou’rt sure thou saw’st it blood?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Both blood and spirit, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I will have all my beds blown up, not stuffed;

								 								Down is too hard: and then, mine oval room

								 								Filled with such pictures as Tiberius took

								 								From Elephantis, and dull Aretine

								 								But coldly imitated. Then, my glasses

								 								Cut in more subtle angles, to disperse

								 								And multiply the figures, as I walk

								 								Naked between my succubae. My mists

								 								I’ll have of perfume, vapoured ’bout the room,

								 								To lose ourselves in; and my baths, like pits

								 								To fall into; from whence we will come forth,

								 								And roll us dry in gossamer and roses.⁠—

								 								Is it arrived at ruby?⁠—Where I spy

								 								A wealthy citizen, or [a] rich lawyer,

								 								Have a sublimed pure wife, unto that fellow

								 								I’ll send a thousand pound to be my cuckold.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And I shall carry it?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								No. I’ll have no bawds,

								 								But fathers and mothers: they will do it best,

								 								Best of all others. And my flatterers

								 								Shall be the pure and gravest of divines,

								 								That I can get for money. My mere fools,

								 								Eloquent burgesses, and then my poets

								 								The same that writ so subtly of the fart,

								 								Whom I will entertain still for that subject.

								 								The few that would give out themselves to be

								 								Court and town-stallions, and, each-where, bely

								 								Ladies who are known most innocent for them;

								 								Those will I beg, to make me eunuchs of:

								 								And they shall fan me with ten ostrich tails

								 								Apiece, made in a plume to gather wind.

								 								We will be brave, Puffe, now we have the medicine.

								 								My meat shall all come in, in Indian shells,

								 								Dishes of agate set in gold, and studded

								 								With emeralds, sapphires, hyacinths, and rubies.

								 								The tongues of carps, dormice, and camels’ heels,

								 								Boiled in the spirit of Sol, and dissolved pearl,

								 								Apicius’ diet, ’gainst the epilepsy:

								 								And I will eat these broths with spoons of amber,

								 								Headed with diamond and carbuncle.

								 								My footboy shall eat pheasants, calvered salmons,

								 								Knots, godwits, lampreys: I myself will have

								 								The beards of barbels served, instead of salads;

								 								Oiled mushrooms; and the swelling unctuous paps

								 								Of a fat pregnant sow, newly cut off,

								 								Dressed with an exquisite, and poignant sauce;

								 								For which, I’ll say unto my cook, “There’s gold,

								 								Go forth, and be a knight.”





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, I’ll go look

								 								A little, how it heightens.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Do.⁠—My shirts

								 								I’ll have of taffeta-sarsnet, soft and light

								 								As cobwebs; and for all my other raiment,

								 								It shall be such as might provoke the Persian,

								 								Were he to teach the world riot anew.

								 								My gloves of fishes’ and birds’ skins, perfumed

								 								With gums of paradise, and eastern air⁠—





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								And do you think to have the stone with this?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								No, I do think t’ have all this with the stone.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Why, I have heard he must be homo frugi,

								 								A pious, holy, and religious man,

								 								One free from mortal sin, a very virgin.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								That makes it, sir; he is so: but I buy it;

								 								My venture brings it me. He, honest wretch,

								 								A notable, superstitious, good soul,

								 								Has worn his knees bare, and his slippers bald,

								 								With prayer and fasting for it: and, sir, let him

								 								Do it alone, for me, still. Here he comes.

								 								Not a profane word afore him: ’tis poison.⁠—





					 						 						 Enter Subtle.

					 						 						 							 								Good morrow, Father.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Gentle son, good morrow,

								 								And to your friend there. What is he, is with you?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								An heretic, that I did bring along,

								 								In hope, sir, to convert him.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Son, I doubt

								 								You are covetous, that thus you meet your time

								 								In the just point: prevent your day at morning.

								 								This argues something, worthy of a fear

								 								Of importune and carnal appetite.

								 								Take heed you do not cause the blessing leave you,

								 								With your ungoverned haste. I should be sorry

								 								To see my labours, now even at perfection,

								 								Got by long watching and large patience,

								 								Not prosper where my love and zeal hath placed them.

								 								Which (heaven I call to witness, with yourself,

								 								To whom I have poured my thoughts) in all my ends,

								 								Have looked no way, but unto public good,

								 								To pious uses, and dear charity

								 								Now grown a prodigy with men. Wherein

								 								If you, my son, should now prevaricate,

								 								And, to your own particular lusts employ

								 								So great and catholic a bliss, be sure

								 								A curse will follow, yea, and overtake

								 								Your subtle and most secret ways.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I know, sir;

								 								You shall not need to fear me; I but come,

								 								To have you confute this gentleman.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Who is,

								 								Indeed, sir, somewhat costive of belief

								 								Toward your stone; would not be gulled.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Well, son,

								 								All that I can convince him in, is this,

								 								The work is done, bright Sol is in his robe.

								 								We have a medicine of the triple soul,

								 								The glorified spirit. Thanks be to heaven,

								 								And make us worthy of it!⁠—Ulen Spiegel!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within. Anon, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Look well to the register.

								 								And let your heat still lessen by degrees,

								 								To the aludels.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within. Yes, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Did you look

								 								On the bolt’s head yet?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within. Which? On D, sir?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ay;

								 								What’s the complexion?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within. Whitish.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Infuse vinegar,

								 								To draw his volatile substance and his tincture:

								 								And let the water in glass E be filtered,

								 								And put into the gripe’s egg. Lute him well;

								 								And leave him closed in balneo.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within. I will, sir.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								What a brave language here is! Next to canting.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I have another work, you never saw, son,

								 								That three days since past the philosopher’s wheel,

								 								In the lent heat of Athanor; and’s become

								 								Sulphur of Nature.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								But ’tis for me?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What need you?

								 								You have enough in that is perfect.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								O but⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, this is covetise!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								No, I assure you,

								 								I shall employ it all in pious uses,

								 								Founding of colleges and grammar schools,

								 								Marrying young virgins, building hospitals,

								 								And now and then a church.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How now!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, please you,

								 								Shall I not change the filter?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Marry, yes;

								 								And bring me the complexion of glass B.





					 						 						 							Exit Face.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Have you another?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, son; were I assured⁠—

								 								Your piety were firm, we would not want

								 								The means to glorify it: but I hope the best.⁠—

								 								I mean to tinct C in sand-heat tomorrow,

								 								And give him imbibition.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Of white oil?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No, sir, of red. F is come over the helm too,

								 								I thank my Maker, in S. Mary’s bath,

								 								And shows lac virginis. Blessed be heaven!

								 								I sent you of his faeces there calcined:

								 								Out of that calx, I have won the salt of mercury.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								By pouring on your rectified water?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, and reverberating in Athanor.





					 						 						 Re-enter Face.

					 						 						 							 								How now! What colour says it?





					 						 Face 						 							 								The ground black, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								That’s your crow’s head?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Your cockscomb’s, is it not?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No, ’tis not perfect. Would it were the crow!

								 								That work wants something.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Aside. O, I looked for this.

								 								The hay’s a pitching.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Are you sure you loosed them

								 								In their own menstrue?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, sir, and then married them,

								 								And put them in a bolt’s head nipped to digestion,

								 								According as you bade me, when I set

								 								The liquor of Mars to circulation

								 								In the same heat.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								The process then was right.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, by the token, sir, the retort brake,

								 								And what was saved was put into the pelican,

								 								And signed with Hermes’ seal.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I think ’twas so.

								 								We should have a new amalgama.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Aside. O, this ferret

								 								Is rank as any polecat.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								But I care not:

								 								Let him e’en die; we have enough beside,

								 								In embrion. H has his white shirt on?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, sir,

								 								He’s ripe for inceration, he stands warm,

								 								In his ash-fire. I would not you should let

								 								Any die now, if I might counsel, sir,

								 								For luck’s sake to the rest: it is not good.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								He says right.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Aside. Ay, are you bolted?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, I know’t, sir,

								 								I have seen the ill fortune. What is some three ounces

								 								Of fresh materials?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Is’t no more?





					 						 Face 						 							 								No more, sir.

								 								Of gold, t’amalgam with some six of mercury.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Away, here’s money. What will serve?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ask him, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								How much?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Give him nine pound:⁠—you may give him ten.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Yes, twenty, and be cozened, do.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								There ’tis.

								 								 									Gives Face the money.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								This needs not; but that you will have it so,

								 								To see conclusions of all: for two

								 								Of our inferior works are at fixation,

								 								A third is in ascension. Go your ways.

								 								Have you set the oil of luna in kemia?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And the philosopher’s vinegar?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								We shall have a salad!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								When do you make projection?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Son, be not hasty, I exalt our medicine,

								 								By hanging him in balneo vaporoso,

								 								And giving him solution; then congeal him;

								 								And then dissolve him; then again congeal him;

								 								For look, how oft I iterate the work,

								 								So many times I add unto his virtue.

								 								As, if at first one ounce convert a hundred,

								 								After his second loose, he’ll turn a thousand;

								 								His third solution, ten; his fourth, a hundred:

								 								After his fifth, a thousand thousand ounces

								 								Of any imperfect metal, into pure

								 								Silver or gold, in all examinations,

								 								As good as any of the natural mine.

								 								Get you your stuff here against afternoon,

								 								Your brass, your pewter, and your andirons.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Not those of iron?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, you may bring them too:

								 								We’ll change all metals.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								I believe you in that.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Then I may send my spits?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, and your racks.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								And dripping-pans, and pot-hangers, and hooks?

								 								Shall he not?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								If he please.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								—To be an ass.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How, sir!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								This gentleman you must bear withal:

								 								I told you he had no faith.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								And little hope, sir;

								 								But much less charity, should I gull myself.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, what have you observed, sir, in our art,

								 								Seems so impossible?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								But your whole work, no more.

								 								That you should hatch gold in a furnace, sir,

								 								As they do eggs in Egypt!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Sir, do you

								 								Believe that eggs are hatched so?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								If I should?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, I think that the greater miracle.

								 								No egg but differs from a chicken more

								 								Than metals in themselves.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								That cannot be.

								 								The egg’s ordained by nature to that end,

								 								And is a chicken in potentia.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								The same we say of lead and other metals,

								 								Which would be gold, if they had time.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								And that

								 								Our art doth further.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ay, for ’twere absurb

								 								To think that nature in the earth bred gold

								 								Perfect in the instant: something went before.

								 								There must be remote matter.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Ay, what is that?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Marry, we say⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Ay, now it heats: stand, Father,

								 								Pound him to dust.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								It is, of the one part,

								 								A humid exhalation, which we call

								 								Materia liquida, or the unctuous water;

								 								On the other part, a certain crass and vicious

								 								Portion of earth; both which, concorporate,

								 								Do make the elementary matter of gold;

								 								Which is not yet propria materia,

								 								But common to all metals and all stones;

								 								For, where it is forsaken of that moisture,

								 								And hath more dryness, it becomes a stone:

								 								Where it retains more of the humid fatness,

								 								It turns to sulphur, or to quicksilver,

								 								Who are the parents of all other metals.

								 								Nor can this remote matter suddenly

								 								Progress so from extreme unto extreme,

								 								As to grow gold, and leap o’er all the means.

								 								Nature doth first beget the imperfect, then

								 								Proceeds she to the perfect. Of that airy

								 								And oily water, mercury is engendered;

								 								Sulphur of the fat and earthy part; the one,

								 								Which is the last, supplying the place of male,

								 								The other of the female, in all metals.

								 								Some do believe hermaphrodeity,

								 								That both do act and suffer. But these two

								 								Make the rest ductile, malleable, extensive.

								 								And even in gold they are; for we do find

								 								Seeds of them, by our fire, and gold in them;

								 								And can produce the species of each metal

								 								More perfect thence, than nature doth in earth.

								 								Beside, who doth not see in daily practice

								 								Art can beget bees, hornets, beetles, wasps,

								 								Out of the carcases and dung of creatures;

								 								Yea, scorpions of an herb, being rightly placed?

								 								And these are living creatures, far more perfect

								 								And excellent than metals.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Well said, Father!

								 								Nay, if he take you in hand, sir, with an argument,

								 								He’ll bray you in a mortar.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Pray you, sir, stay.

								 								Rather than I’ll be brayed, sir, I’ll believe

								 								That Alchemy is a pretty kind of game,

								 								Somewhat like tricks o’ the cards, to cheat a man

								 								With charming.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Sir?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								What else are all your terms,

								 								Whereon no one of your writers ’grees with other?

								 								Of your elixir, your lac virginis,

								 								Your stone, your medicine, and your chrysosperm,

								 								Your sal, your sulphur, and your mercury,

								 								Your oil of height, your tree of life, your blood,

								 								Your marcasite, your tutie, your magnesia,

								 								Your toad, your crow, your dragon, and your panther;

								 								Your sun, your moon, your firmament, your adrop,

								 								Your lato, azoch, zernich, chibrit, heautarit,

								 								And then your red man, and your white woman,

								 								With all your broths, your menstrues, and materials,

								 								Of piss and eggshells, women’s terms, man’s blood,

								 								Hair o’ the head, burnt clouts, chalk, merds, and clay,

								 								Powder of bones, scalings of iron, glass,

								 								And worlds of other strange ingredients,

								 								Would burst a man to name?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And all these named,

								 								Intending but one thing; which art our writers

								 								Used to obscure their art.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Sir, so I told him⁠—

								 								Because the simple idiot should not learn it,

								 								And make it vulgar.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Was not all the knowledge

								 								Of the Egyptians writ in mystic symbols?

								 								Speak not the scriptures oft in parables?

								 								Are not the choicest fables of the poets,

								 								That were the fountains and first springs of wisdom,

								 								Wrapped in perplexed allegories?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I urged that,

								 								And cleared to him, that Sisyphus was damned

								 								To roll the ceaseless stone, only because

								 								He would have made Ours common.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Appears at the door.⁠—

								 								Who is this?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Sprecious!⁠—What do you mean? Go in, good lady,

								 								Let me entreat you.





					 						 						 Dol retires.

					 						 						 							 								—Where’s this varlet?





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You very knave! Do you use me thus?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Wherein, sir?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Go in and see, you traitor. Go!





					 						 						 							Exit Face.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Who is it, sir?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Nothing, sir; nothing.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								What’s the matter, good sir?

								 								I have not seen you thus distempered: who is’t?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								All arts have still had, sir, their adversaries;

								 								But ours the most ignorant.⁠—





					 						 						 Re-enter Face.

					 						 						 							 								What now?





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Twas not my fault, sir; she would speak with you.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Would she, sir! Follow me.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Stopping him. Stay, Lungs.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I dare not, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Stay, man; what is she?





					 						 Face 						 							 								A lord’s sister, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								How! Pray thee, stay.





					 						 Face 						 							 								She’s mad, sir, and sent hither⁠—

								 								He’ll be mad too.⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I warrant thee.⁠—

								 								Why sent hither?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, to be cured.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Within. Why, rascal!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Lo you!⁠—Here, sir!





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								’Fore God, a Bradamante, a brave piece.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Heart, this is a bawdyhouse! I will be burnt else.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								O, by this light, no: do not wrong him. He’s

								 								Too scrupulous that way: it is his vice.

								 								No, he’s a rare physician, do him right,

								 								An excellent Paracelsian, and has done

								 								Strange cures with mineral physic. He deals all

								 								With spirits, he; he will not hear a word

								 								Of Galen; or his tedious recipes.⁠—





					 						 						 Re-enter Face.

					 						 						 							 								How now, Lungs!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Softly, sir; speak softly. I meant

								 								To have told your worship all. This must not hear.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								No, he will not be “gulled;” let him alone.





					 						 Face 						 							 								You are very right, sir, she is a most rare scholar,

								 								And is gone mad with studying Broughton’s works.

								 								If you but name a word touching the Hebrew,

								 								She falls into her fit, and will discourse

								 								So learnedly of genealogies,

								 								As you would run mad too, to hear her, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								How might one do t’ have conference with her, Lungs?





					 						 Face 						 							 								O divers have run mad upon the conference:

								 								I do not know, sir. I am sent in haste,

								 								To fetch a vial.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Be not gulled, Sir Mammon.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Wherein? Pray ye, be patient.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Yes, as you are,

								 								And trust confederate knaves and bawds and whores.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								You are too foul, believe it.⁠—Come here, Ulen,

								 								One word.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I dare not, in good faith.

								 								 									Going.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Stay, knave.





					 						 Face 						 							 								He is extreme angry that you saw her, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Drink that. Gives him money.

								 								What is she when she’s out of her fit?





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, the most affablest creature, sir! So merry!

								 								So pleasant! She’ll mount you up, like quicksilver,

								 								Over the helm; and circulate like oil,

								 								A very vegetal: discourse of state,

								 								Of mathematics, bawdry, anything⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Is she no way accessible? No means,

								 								No trick to give a man a taste of her⁠—wit⁠—

								 								Or so?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Within. Ulen!





					 						 Face 						 							 								I’ll come to you again, sir.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Surly, I did not think one of your breeding

								 								Would traduce personages of worth.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Sir Epicure,

								 								Your friend to use; yet still loth to be gulled:

								 								I do not like your philosophical bawds.

								 								Their stone is letchery enough to pay for,

								 								Without this bait.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								’Heart, you abuse yourself.

								 								I know the lady, and her friends, and means,

								 								The original of this disaster. Her brother

								 								Has told me all.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								And yet you never saw her

								 								Till now!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								O yes, but I forgot. I have, believe it,

								 								One of the treacherousest memories, I do think,

								 								Of all mankind.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								What call you her brother?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								My lord⁠—

								 								He will not have his name known, now I think on’t.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								A very treacherous memory!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								On my faith⁠—





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Tut, if you have it not about you, pass it,

								 								Till we meet next.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Nay, by this hand, ’tis true.

								 								He’s one I honour, and my noble friend;

								 								And I respect his house.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Heart! Can it be,

								 								That a grave sir, a rich, that has no need,

								 								A wise sir, too, at other times, should thus,

								 								With his own oaths, and arguments, make hard means

								 								To gull himself? An this be your elixir,

								 								Your lapis mineralis, and your lunary,

								 								Give me your honest trick yet at primero,

								 								Or gleek; and take your lutum sapientis,

								 								Your menstruum simplex! I’ll have gold before you,

								 								And with less danger of the quicksilver,

								 								Or the hot sulphur.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Here’s one from Captain Face, sir,

								 								 									To Surly.

								 								Desires you meet him in the Temple-church,

								 								Some half-hour hence, and upon earnest business.

								 								 									Whispers to Mammon.

								 								Sir, if you please to quit us, now; and come

								 								Again within two hours, you shall have

								 								My master busy examining o’ the works;

								 								And I will steal you in, unto the party,

								 								That you may see her converse.⁠—Sir, shall I say,

								 								You’ll meet the Captain’s worship?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Sir, I will.⁠—

								 								 									Walks aside.

								 								But, by attorney, and to a second purpose.

								 								Now, I am sure it is a bawdyhouse;

								 								I’ll swear it, were the Marshal here to thank me:

								 								The naming this Commander doth confirm it.

								 								Don Face! Why, he’s the most authentic dealer

								 								In these commodities, the superintendant

								 								To all the quainter traffickers in town!

								 								He is the visitor, and does appoint,

								 								Who lies with whom, and at what hour; what price;

								 								Which gown, and in what smock; what fall; what tire.

								 								Him will I prove, by a third person, to find

								 								The subtleties of this dark labyrinth:

								 								Which if I do discover, dear Sir Mammon,

								 								You’ll give your poor friend leave, though no philosopher,

								 								To laugh: for you that are, ’tis thought, shall weep.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, he does pray, you’ll not forget.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								I will not, sir.

								 								Sir Epicure, I shall leave you.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I follow you, straight.





					 						 Face 						 							 								But do so, good sir, to avoid suspicion.

								 								This gentleman has a parlous head.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								But wilt thou Ulen,

								 								Be constant to thy promise?





					 						 Face 						 							 								As my life, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								And wilt thou insinuate what I am, and praise me,

								 								And say, I am a noble fellow?





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, what else, sir?

								 								And that you’ll make her royal with the stone,

								 								An empress; and yourself, King of Bantam.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Wilt thou do this?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Will I, sir!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Lungs, my Lungs!

								 								I love thee.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Send your stuff, sir, that my master

								 								May busy himself about projection.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Thou hast witched me, rogue: take, go.

								 								 									Gives him money.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Your jack, and all, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Thou art a villain⁠—I will send my jack,

								 								And the weights too. Slave, I could bite thine ear.

								 								Away, thou dost not care for me.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Not I, sir!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Come, I was born to make thee, my good weasel,

								 								Set thee on a bench, and have thee twirl a chain

								 								With the best lord’s vermin of ’em all.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Away, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								A count, nay, a count palatine⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good, sir, go.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Shall not advance thee better: no, nor faster.





					 						 						 Exit.

					 						 						 Re-enter Subtle and Dol.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Has he bit? Has he bit?





					 						 Face 						 							 								And swallowed, too, my Subtle.

								 								I have given him line, and now he plays, i’faith.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And shall we twitch him?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Thorough both the gills.

								 								A wench is a rare bait, with which a man

								 								No sooner’s taken, but he straight firks mad.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Dol, my Lord What’ts’hums sister, you must now

								 								Bear yourself statelich.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								O let me alone.

								 								I’ll not forget my race, I warrant you.

								 								I’ll keep my distance, laugh and talk aloud;

								 								Have all the tricks of a proud scurvy lady,

								 								And be as rude as her woman.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Well said, sanguine!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								But will he send his andirons?





					 						 Face 						 							 								His jack too,

								 								And’s iron shoeing-horn; I have spoke to him. Well,

								 								I must not lose my wary gamester yonder.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O Monsieur Caution, that will not be gulled?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay,

								 								If I can strike a fine hook into him, now!

								 								The Temple-church, there I have cast mine angle.

								 								Well, pray for me. I’ll about it.

								 								 									Knocking without.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What, more gudgeons!

								 								Dol, scout, scout!

								 								 									Dol goes to the window.

								 								Stay, Face, you must go to the door,

								 								’Pray God it be my Anabaptist⁠—Who is’t, Dol?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								I know him not: he looks like a gold-endman.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ods so! ’Tis he, he said he would send what call you him?

								 								The sanctified elder, that should deal

								 								For Mammon’s jack and andirons. Let him in.

								 								Stay, help me off, first, with my gown.





					 						 						 Exit Face with the gown.

					 						 						 							 								Away,

								 								Madam, to your withdrawing chamber.





					 						 						 Exit Dol.

					 						 						 							 								Now,

								 								In a new tune, new gesture, but old language.⁠—

								 								This fellow is sent from one negotiates with me

								 								About the stone too, for the holy Brethren

								 								Of Amsterdam, the exiled saints, that hope

								 								To raise their discipline by it. I must use him

								 								In some strange fashion, now, to make him admire me.⁠—





					 						 						 Enter Ananias.

					 						 						 							 								 									Aloud.

								 								Where is my drudge?





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Take away the recipient,

								 								And rectify your menstrue from the phlegma.

								 								Then pour it on the Sol, in the cucurbite,

								 								And let them macerate together.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, sir.

								 								And save the ground?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No: Terra damnata

								 								Must not have entrance in the work.⁠—Who are you?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								A faithful brother, if it please you.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What’s that?

								 								A Lullianist? A Ripley? Filius artis?

								 								Can you sublime and dulcify? Calcine?

								 								Know you the sapor pontic? Sapor stiptic?

								 								Or what is homogene, or heterogene?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								I understand no heathen language, truly.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Heathen! You Knipper-doling? Is Ars sacra,

								 								Or chrysopoeia, or spagyrica,

								 								Or the pamphysic, or panarchic knowledge,

								 								A heathen language?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Heathen Greek, I take it.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How! Heathen Greek?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								All’s heathen but the Hebrew.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Sirrah, my varlet, stand you forth and speak to him,

								 								Like a philosopher: answer in the language.

								 								Name the vexations, and the martyrisations

								 								Of metals in the work.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, putrefaction,

								 								Solution, ablution, sublimation,

								 								Cohobation, calcination, ceration, and

								 								Fixation.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								This is heathen Greek to you, now!⁠—

								 								And when comes vivification?





					 						 Face 						 							 								After mortification.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What’s cohobation?





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Tis the pouring on

								 								Your aqua regis, and then drawing him off,

								 								To the trine circle of the seven spheres.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What’s the proper passion of metals?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Malleation.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What’s your ultimum supplicium auri?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Antimonium.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								This is heathen Greek to you!⁠—And what’s your mercury?





					 						 Face 						 							 								A very fugitive, he will be gone, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How know you him?





					 						 Face 						 							 								By his viscosity,

								 								His oleosity, and his suscitability.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How do you sublime him?





					 						 Face 						 							 								With the calce of eggshells,

								 								White marble, talc.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Your magisterium now,

								 								What’s that?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Shifting, sir, your elements,

								 								Dry into cold, cold into moist, moist into hot,

								 								Hot into dry.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								This is heathen Greek to you still!

								 								Your lapis philosophicus?





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Tis a stone,

								 								And not a stone; a spirit, a soul, and a body:

								 								Which if you do dissolve, it is dissolved;

								 								If you coagulate, it is coagulated;

								 								If you make it to fly, it flieth.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Enough.





					 						 						 Exit Face.

					 						 						 							 								This is heathen Greek to you! What are you, sir?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Please you, a servant of the exiled Brethren,

								 								That deal with widows’ and with orphans’ goods,

								 								And make a just account unto the Saints:

								 								A Deacon.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, you are sent from master Wholesome,

								 								Your teacher?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								From Tribulation Wholesome,

								 								Our very zealous pastor.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Good! I have

								 								Some orphans’ goods to come here.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Of what kind, sir?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Pewter and brass, andirons and kitchenware,

								 								Metals, that we must use our medicine on:

								 								Wherein the Brethren may have a pennyworth

								 								For ready money.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Were the orphans’ parents

								 								Sincere professors?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why do you ask?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Because

								 								We then are to deal justly, and give, in truth,

								 								Their utmost value.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Slid, you’d cozen else,

								 								And if their parents were not of the faithful!⁠—

								 								I will not trust you, now I think on it,

								 								’Till I have talked with your pastor. Have you brought money

								 								To buy more coals?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								No, surely.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No! How so?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								The Brethren bid me say unto you, sir,

								 								Surely, they will not venture any more,

								 								Till they may see projection.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How!





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								You have had,

								 								For the instruments, as bricks, and loam, and glasses,

								 								Already thirty pound; and for materials,

								 								They say, some ninety more: and they have heard since,

								 								That one at Heidelberg, made it of an egg,

								 								And a small paper of pin-dust.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What’s your name?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								My name is Ananias.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Out, the varlet

								 								That cozened the Apostles! Hence, away!

								 								Flee, mischief! Had your holy Consistory

								 								No name to send me, of another sound,

								 								Than wicked Ananias? Send your elders

								 								Hither to make atonement for you quickly,

								 								And give me satisfaction; or out goes

								 								The fire; and down th’ alembics, and the furnace,

								 								Piger Henricus, or whatnot. Thou wretch!

								 								Both sericon and bufo shall be lost,

								 								Tell them. All hope of rooting out the Bishops,

								 								Or the antichristian hierarchy, shall perish,

								 								If they stay threescore minutes: the aqueity,

								 								Terreity, and sulphureity

								 								Shall run together again, and all be annulled,

								 								Thou wicked Ananias!





					 						 						 Exit Ananias.

					 						 						 							 								This will fetch ’em,

								 								And make them haste towards their gulling more.

								 								A man must deal like a rough nurse, and fright

								 								Those that are froward, to an appetite.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face, in his uniform, followed by Drugger.

					 						 Face 						 							 								He is busy with his spirits, but we’ll upon him.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How now! What mates, what Baiards have we here?





					 						 Face 						 							 								I told you, he would be furious.⁠—Sir, here’s Nab,

								 								Has brought you another piece of gold to look on:

								 								—We must appease him. Give it me⁠—and prays you,

								 								You would devise⁠—what is it, Nab?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								A sign, sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay, a good lucky one, a thriving sign, Doctor.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I was devising now.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Slight, do not say so,

								 								He will repent he gave you any more⁠—

								 								What say you to his constellation, Doctor,

								 								The Balance?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No, that way is stale, and common.

								 								A townsman born in Taurus, gives the bull,

								 								Or the bull’s-head: in Aries, the ram,

								 								A poor device! No, I will have his name

								 								Formed in some mystic character; whose radii,

								 								Striking the senses of the passers by,

								 								Shall, by a virtual influence, breed affections,

								 								That may result upon the party owns it:

								 								As thus⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nab!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								He shall have “a bell,” that’s “Abel;”

								 								And by it standing one whose name is “Dee,”

								 								In a “rug” gown, there’s “D,” and “Rug,” that’s “drug:”

								 								And right anenst him a dog snarling “er;”

								 								There’s “Drugger,” Abel Drugger. That’s his sign.

								 								And here’s now mystery and hieroglyphic!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Abel, thou art made.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Sir, I do thank his worship.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Six o’ thy legs more will not do it, Nab.

								 								He has brought you a pipe of tobacco, Doctor.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir;

								 								I have another thing I would impart⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Out with it, Nab.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Sir, there is lodged, hard by me,

								 								A rich young widow⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good! A bona roba?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								But nineteen, at the most.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Very good, Abel.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Marry, she’s not in fashion yet; she wears

								 								A hood, but it stands a cop.





					 						 Face 						 							 								No matter, Abel.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								And I do now and then give her a fucus⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								What! Dost thou deal, Nab?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I did tell you, Captain.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								And physic too, sometime, sir; for which she trusts me

								 								With all her mind. She’s come up here of purpose

								 								To learn the fashion.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good (his match too!)⁠—On, Nab.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								And she does strangely long to know her fortune.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ods lid, Nab, send her to the Doctor, hither.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, I have spoke to her of his worship already;

								 								But she’s afraid it will be blown abroad,

								 								And hurt her marriage.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Hurt it! ’Tis the way

								 								To heal it, if ’twere hurt; to make it more

								 								Followed and sought: Nab, thou shalt tell her this.

								 								She’ll be more known, more talked of; and your widows

								 								Are ne’er of any price till they be famous;

								 								Their honour is their multitude of suitors.

								 								Send her, it may be thy good fortune. What!

								 								Thou dost not know.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								No, sir, she’ll never marry

								 								Under a knight: her brother has made a vow.





					 						 Face 						 							 								What! And dost thou despair, my little Nab,

								 								Knowing what the Doctor has set down for thee,

								 								And seeing so many of the city dubbed?

								 								One glass o’ thy water, with a Madam I know,

								 								Will have it done, Nab: what’s her brother, a knight?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								No, sir, a gentleman newly warm in his land, sir,

								 								Scarce cold in his one and twenty, that does govern

								 								His sister here; and is a man himself

								 								Of some three thousand a year, and is come up

								 								To learn to quarrel, and to live by his wits,

								 								And will go down again, and die in the country.





					 						 Face 						 							 								How! To quarrel?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir, to carry quarrels,

								 								As gallants do; to manage them by line.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Slid, Nab, the Doctor is the only man

								 								In Christendom for him. He has made a table,

								 								With mathematical demonstrations,

								 								Touching the art of quarrels: he will give him

								 								An instrument to quarrel by. Go, bring them both,

								 								Him and his sister. And, for thee, with her

								 								The Doctor haply may persuade. Go to:

								 								’Shalt give his worship a new damask suit

								 								Upon the premises.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, good Captain!





					 						 Face 						 							 								He shall;

								 								He is the honestest fellow, Doctor.⁠—Stay not,

								 								No offers; bring the damask, and the parties.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								I’ll try my power, sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And thy will too, Nab.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Tis good tobacco, this! What is’t an ounce?





					 						 Face 						 							 								He’ll send you a pound, Doctor.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O no.





					 						 Face 						 							 								He will do’t.

								 								It is the goodest soul!⁠—Abel, about it.

								 								Thou shalt know more anon. Away, be gone.





					 						 						 Exit Drugger.

					 						 						 							 								A miserable rogue, and lives with cheese,

								 								And has the worms. That was the cause, indeed,

								 								Why he came now: he dealt with me in private,

								 								To get a medicine for them.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And shall, sir. This works.





					 						 Face 						 							 								A wife, a wife for one on us, my dear Subtle!

								 								We’ll e’en draw lots, and he that fails, shall have

								 								The more in goods, the other has in tail.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Rather the less: for she may be so light

								 								She may want grains.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay, or be such a burden,

								 								A man would scarce endure her for the whole.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Faith, best let’s see her first, and then determine.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Content: but Dol must have no breath on’t.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Mum.

								 								Away you, to your Surly yonder, catch him.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Pray God I have not stayed too long.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I fear it.





					 						 						 							Exeunt.





Act III




Scene I


				The lane before Lovewit’s house.

				 					 						 						 Enter Tribulation Wholesome and Ananias.

					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								These chastisements are common to the saints,

								 								And such rebukes, we of the separation

								 								Must bear with willing shoulders, as the trials

								 								Sent forth to tempt our frailties.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								In pure zeal,

								 								I do not like the man; he is a heathen,

								 								And speaks the language of Canaan, truly.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								I think him a profane person indeed.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								He bears

								 								The visible mark of the beast in his forehead.

								 								And for his stone, it is a work of darkness,

								 								And with philosophy blinds the eyes of man.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Good brother, we must bend unto all means,

								 								That may give furtherance to the holy cause.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Which his cannot: the sanctified cause

								 								Should have a sanctified course.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Not always necessary:

								 								The children of perdition are ofttimes

								 								Made instruments even of the greatest works:

								 								Beside, we should give somewhat to man’s nature,

								 								The place he lives in, still about the fire,

								 								And fume of metals, that intoxicate

								 								The brain of man, and make him prone to passion.

								 								Where have you greater atheists than your cooks?

								 								Or more profane, or choleric, than your glass-men?

								 								More antichristian than your bell-founders?

								 								What makes the Devil so devilish, I would ask you,

								 								Satan, our common enemy, but his being

								 								Perpetually about the fire, and boiling

								 								Brimstone and arsenic? We must give, I say,

								 								Unto the motives, and the stirrers up

								 								Of humours in the blood. It may be so,

								 								When as the work is done, the stone is made,

								 								This heat of his may turn into a zeal,

								 								And stand up for the beauteous discipline,

								 								Against the menstruous cloth and rag of Rome.

								 								We must await his calling, and the coming

								 								Of the good spirit. You did fault, t’ upbraid him

								 								With the Brethren’s blessing of Heidelberg, weighing

								 								What need we have to hasten on the work,

								 								For the restoring of the silenced saints,

								 								Which ne’er will be, but by the philosopher’s stone.

								 								And so a learned elder, one of Scotland,

								 								Assured me; aurum potabile being

								 								The only medicine, for the civil magistrate,

								 								T’ incline him to a feeling of the cause;

								 								And must be daily used in the disease.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								I have not edified more, truly, by man;

								 								Not since the beautiful light first shone on me:

								 								And I am sad my zeal hath so offended.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Let us call on him then.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								The motion’s good,

								 								And of the spirit; I will knock first.

								 								 									Knocks.

								 								Peace be within!





					 						 						 							The door is opened, and they enter.





Scene II


				A room in Lovewit’s house.

				 					 						 						 Enter Subtle, followed by Tribulation and Ananias.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, are you come? ’Twas time. Your threescore minutes

								 								Were at last thread, you see: and down had gone

								 								 									Furnus acediae, turris circulatorius:

								 								Lembec, bolt’s head, retort and pelican

								 								Had all been cinders.⁠—Wicked Ananias!

								 								Art thou returned? Nay then, it goes down yet.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Sir, be appeased; he is come to humble

								 								Himself in spirit, and to ask your patience,

								 								If too much zeal hath carried him aside

								 								From the due path.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, this doth qualify!





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								The Brethren had no purpose, verily,

								 								To give you the least grievance; but are ready

								 								To lend their willing hands to any project

								 								The spirit and you direct.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								This qualifies more!





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								And for the orphans’ goods, let them be valued,

								 								Or what is needful else to the holy work,

								 								It shall be numbered; here, by me, the Saints,

								 								Throw down their purse before you.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								This qualifies most!

								 								Why, thus it should be, now you understand.

								 								Have I discoursed so unto you of our stone,

								 								And of the good that it shall bring your cause?

								 								Showed you (beside the main of hiring forces

								 								Abroad, drawing the Hollanders, your friends,

								 								From the Indies, to serve you, with all their fleet)

								 								That even the medicinal use shall make you a faction,

								 								And party in the realm? As, put the case,

								 								That some great man in state, he have the gout,

								 								Why, you but send three drops of your elixir,

								 								You help him straight: there you have made a friend.

								 								Another has the palsy or the dropsy,

								 								He takes of your incombustible stuff,

								 								He’s young again: there you have made a friend,

								 								A lady that is past the feat of body,

								 								Though not of mind, and hath her face decayed

								 								Beyond all cure of paintings, you restore,

								 								With the oil of talc: there you have made a friend;

								 								And all her friends. A lord that is a leper,

								 								A knight that has the bone-ache, or a squire

								 								That hath both these, you make them smooth and sound,

								 								With a bare fricace of your medicine: still

								 								You increase your friends.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Ay, it is very pregnant.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And then the turning of this lawyer’s pewter

								 								To plate at Christmas.⁠—





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Christ-tide, I pray you.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yet, Ananias!





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								I have done.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Or changing

								 								His parcel gilt to massy gold. You cannot

								 								But raise you friends. Withal, to be of power

								 								To pay an army in the field, to buy

								 								The King of France out of his realms, or Spain

								 								Out of his Indies. What can you not do

								 								Against lords spiritual or temporal,

								 								That shall oppone you?





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Verily, ’tis true.

								 								We may be temporal lords ourselves, I take it.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You may be anything, and leave off to make

								 								Long-winded exercises; or suck up

								 								Your “ha!” and “hum!” in a tune. I not deny,

								 								But such as are not graced in a state,

								 								May, for their ends, be adverse in religion,

								 								And get a tune to call the flock together:

								 								For, to say sooth, a tune does much with women,

								 								And other phlegmatic people; it is your bell.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Bells are profane; a tune may be religious.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No warning with you! Then farewell my patience.

								 								’Slight, it shall down: I will not be thus tortured.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								I pray you, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								All shall perish. I have spoken it.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Let me find grace, sir, in your eyes; the man

								 								He stands corrected: neither did his zeal,

								 								But as yourself, allow a tune somewhere.

								 								Which now, being toward the stone, we shall not need.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No, nor your holy vizard, to win widows

								 								To give you legacies; or make zealous wives

								 								To rob their husbands for the common cause:

								 								Nor take the start of bonds broke but one day,

								 								And say, they were forfeited by providence.

								 								Nor shall you need o’er night to eat huge meals,

								 								To celebrate your next day’s fast the better;

								 								The whilst the Brethren and the Sisters humbled,

								 								Abate the stiffness of the flesh. Nor cast

								 								Before your hungry hearers scrupulous bones;

								 								As whether a Christian may hawk or hunt,

								 								Or whether matrons of the holy assembly

								 								May lay their hair out, or wear doublets,

								 								Or have that idol starch about their linen.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								It is indeed an idol.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Mind him not, sir.

								 								I do command thee, spirit of zeal, but trouble,

								 								To peace within him! Pray you, sir, go on.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Nor shall you need to libel ’gainst the prelates,

								 								And shorten so your ears against the hearing

								 								Of the next wire-drawn grace. Nor of necessity

								 								Rail against plays, to please the alderman

								 								Whose daily custard you devour; nor lie

								 								With zealous rage till you are hoarse. Not one

								 								Of these so singular arts. Nor call yourselves

								 								By names of Tribulation, Persecution,

								 								Restraint, Long-patience, and suchlike, affected

								 								By the whole family or wood of you,

								 								Only for glory, and to catch the ear

								 								Of the disciple.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Truly, sir, they are

								 								Ways that the godly Brethren have invented,

								 								For propagation of the glorious cause,

								 								As very notable means, and whereby also

								 								Themselves grow soon, and profitably, famous.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, but the stone, all’s idle to it! Nothing!

								 								The art of angels’ nature’s miracle,

								 								The divine secret that doth fly in clouds

								 								From east to west: and whose tradition

								 								Is not from men, but spirits.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								I hate traditions;

								 								I do not trust them⁠—





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Peace!





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								They are popish all.

								 								I will not peace: I will not⁠—





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Ananias!





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Please the profane, to grieve the godly; I may not.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Well, Ananias, thou shalt overcome.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								It is an ignorant zeal that haunts him, sir;

								 								But truly, else, a very faithful Brother,

								 								A botcher, and a man, by revelation,

								 								That hath a competent knowledge of the truth.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Has he a competent sum there in the bag

								 								To buy the goods within? I am made guardian,

								 								And must, for charity, and conscience sake,

								 								Now see the most be made for my poor orphan;

								 								Though I desire the Brethren too good gainers:

								 								There they are within. When you have viewed and bought ’em,

								 								And ta’en the inventory of what they are,

								 								They are ready for projection; there’s no more

								 								To do: cast on the medicine, so much silver

								 								As there is tin there, so much gold as brass,

								 								I’ll give’t you in by weight.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								But how long time,

								 								Sir, must the saints expect yet?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Let me see,

								 								How’s the moon now? Eight, nine, ten days hence,

								 								He will be silver potate; then three days

								 								Before he citronise: Some fifteen days,

								 								The magisterium will be perfected.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								About the second day of the third week,

								 								In the ninth month?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, my good Ananias.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								What will the orphan’s goods arise to, think you?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Some hundred marks, as much as filled three cars,

								 								Unladed now: you’ll make six millions of them.⁠—

								 								But I must have more coals laid in.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								How?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Another load,

								 								And then we have finished. We must now increase

								 								Our fire to ignis ardens; we are past

								 								 									Fimus equinus, balnei, cineris,

								 								And all those lenter heats. If the holy purse

								 								Should with this draught fall low, and that the saints

								 								Do need a present sum, I have a trick

								 								To melt the pewter, you shall buy now, instantly,

								 								And with a tincture make you as good Dutch dollars

								 								As any are in Holland.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Can you so?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ay, and shall ’bide the third examination.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								It will be joyful tidings to the Brethren.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								But you must carry it secret.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Ay; but stay,

								 								This act of coining, is it lawful?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Lawful!

								 								We know no magistrate; or, if we did,

								 								This is foreign coin.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								It is no coining, sir.

								 								It is but casting.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Ha! You distinguish well:

								 								Casting of money may be lawful.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								’Tis, sir.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Truly, I take it so.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								There is no scruple,

								 								Sir, to be made of it; believe Ananias:

								 								This case of conscience he is studied in.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								I’ll make a question of it to the Brethren.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								The Brethren shall approve it lawful, doubt not.

								 								Where shall it be done?





					 						 						 							Knocking without.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								For that we’ll talk anon.

								 								There’s some to speak with me. Go in, I pray you,

								 								And view the parcels. That’s the inventory.

								 								I’ll come to you straight.





					 						 						 Exeunt Tribulation and Ananias

					 						 						 							 								Who is it?⁠—Face! Appear.





					 						 						 Enter Face in his uniform.

					 						 						 							 								How now! Good prize?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good pox! Yond’ costive cheater

								 								Never came on.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How then?





					 						 Face 						 							 								I have walked the round

								 								Till now, and no such thing.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And have you quit him?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Quit him! An hell would quit him too, he were happy.

								 								’Slight! Would you have me stalk like a mill-jade,

								 								All day, for one that will not yield us grains?

								 								I know him of old.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, but to have gulled him,

								 								Had been a mastery.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Let him go, black boy!

								 								And turn thee, that some fresh news may possess thee.

								 								A noble count, a don of Spain, my dear

								 								Delicious compeer, and my party-bawd,

								 								Who is come hither private for his conscience,

								 								And brought munition with him, six great slops,

								 								Bigger than three Dutch hoys, beside round trunks,

								 								Furnished with pistolets, and pieces of eight,

								 								Will straight be here, my rogue, to have thy bath,

								 								(That is the colour,) and to make his battery

								 								Upon our Dol, our castle, our Cinque-Port,

								 								Our Dover pier, our what thou wilt. Where is she?

								 								She must prepare perfumes, delicate linen,

								 								The bath in chief, a banquet, and her wit,

								 								For she must milk his epididimis.

								 								Where is the doxy?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I’ll send her to thee:

								 								And but despatch my brace of little John Leydens,

								 								And come again myself.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Are they within then?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Numbering the sum.





					 						 Face 						 							 								How much?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								A hundred marks, boy.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, this is a lucky day. Ten pounds of Mammon!

								 								Three of my clerk! A portague of my grocer!

								 								This of the Brethren! Beside reversions,

								 								And states to come in the widow, and my count!

								 								My share today will not be bought for forty⁠—





					 						 						 							Enter Dol.

					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								What?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Pounds, dainty Dorothy! Art thou so near?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yes; say, lord General, how fares our camp?





					 						 Face 						 							 								As with the few that had entrenched themselves

								 								Safe, by their discipline, against a world, Dol,

								 								And laughed within those trenches, and grew fat

								 								With thinking on the booties, Dol, brought in

								 								Daily by their small parties. This dear hour,

								 								A doughty don is taken with my Dol;

								 								And thou mayst make his ransom what thou wilt,

								 								My Dousabel; he shall be brought here fettered

								 								With thy fair looks, before he sees thee; and thrown

								 								In a down-bed, as dark as any dungeon;

								 								Where thou shalt keep him waking with thy drum;

								 								Thy drum, my Dol, thy drum; till he be tame

								 								As the poor blackbirds were in the great frost,

								 								Or bees are with a bason; and so hive him

								 								In the swanskin coverlid, and cambric sheets,

								 								Till he work honey and wax, my little God’s-gift.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								What is he, General?





					 						 Face 						 							 								An adalantado,

								 								A grandee, girl. Was not my Dapper here yet?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								No.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nor my Drugger?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Neither.





					 						 Face 						 							 								A pox on ’em,

								 								They are so long a furnishing! Such stinkards

								 								Would not be seen upon these festival days.⁠—





					 						 						 Re-enter Subtle.

					 						 						 							 								How now! Have you done?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Done. They are gone: the sum

								 								Is here in bank, my Face. I would we knew

								 								Another chapman now would buy ’em outright.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Slid, Nab shall do’t against he have the widow,

								 								To furnish household.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Excellent, well thought on:

								 								Pray God he come!





					 						 Face 						 							 								I pray he keep away

								 								Till our new business be o’erpast.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								But, Face,

								 								How cam’st thou by this secret don?





					 						 Face 						 							 								A spirit

								 								Brought me th’ intelligence in a paper here,

								 								As I was conjuring yonder in my circle

								 								For Surly; I have my flies abroad. Your bath

								 								Is famous, Subtle, by my means. Sweet Dol,

								 								You must go tune your virginal, no losing

								 								O’ the least time: and, do you hear? Good action.

								 								Firk, like a flounder; kiss, like a scallop, close;

								 								And tickle him with thy mother tongue. His great

								 								Verdugoship has not a jot of language;

								 								So much the easier to be cozened, my Dolly.

								 								He will come here in a hired coach, obscure,

								 								And our own coachman, whom I have sent as guide,

								 								No creature else.

								 								 									Knocking without.

								 								Who’s that?





					 						 						 							Exit Dol.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								It is not he?





					 						 Face 						 							 								O no, not yet this hour.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Dol.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Who is’t?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Dapper,

								 								Your clerk.





					 						 Face 						 							 								God’s will then, Queen of Fairy,

								 								On with your tire; and, Doctor, with your robes.





					 						 						 							Exit Dol.

					 						 						 							 								Let’s dispatch him for God’s sake.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Twill be long.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I warrant you, take but the cues I give you,

								 								It shall be brief enough.

								 								 									Goes to the window.

								 								’Slight, here are more!

								 								Abel, and I think the angry boy, the heir,

								 								That fain would quarrel.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And the widow?





					 						 Face 						 							 								No,

								 								Not that I see. Away!





					 						 						 Exit Subtle.

					 						 						 Enter Dapper.

					 						 						 							 								O sir, you are welcome.

								 								The Doctor is within a moving for you;

								 								I have had the most ado to win him to it!⁠—

								 								He swears you’ll be the darling of the dice:

								 								He never heard her Highness dote till now.

								 								Your aunt has given you the most gracious words

								 								That can be thought on.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Shall I see her Grace?





					 						 Face 						 							 								See her, and kiss her too.⁠—





					 						 						 Enter Drugger, followed by Kastril.

					 						 						 							 								What, honest Nab!

								 								Hast brought the damask?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								No, sir; here’s tobacco.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Tis well done, Nab; thou’lt bring the damask too?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes: here’s the gentleman, Captain, master Kastril,

								 								I have brought to see the Doctor.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Where’s the widow?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Sir, as he likes, his sister, he says, shall come.





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, is it so? Good time. Is your name Kastril, sir?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Ay, and the best of the Kastrils, I’d be sorry else,

								 								By fifteen hundred a year. Where is the Doctor?

								 								My mad tobacco-boy, here, tells me of one

								 								That can do things: has he any skill?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Wherein, sir?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								To carry a business, manage a quarrel fairly,

								 								Upon fit terms.





					 						 Face 						 							 								It seems, sir, you are but young

								 								About the town, that can make that a question.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Sir, not so young, but I have heard some speech

								 								Of the angry boys, and seen them take tobacco;

								 								And in his shop; and I can take it too.

								 								And I would fain be one of ’em, and go down

								 								And practise in the country.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, for the duello,

								 								The Doctor, I assure you, shall inform you,

								 								To the least shadow of a hair; and show you

								 								An instrument he has of his own making,

								 								Wherewith no sooner shall you make report

								 								Of any quarrel, but he will take the height on’t

								 								Most instantly, and tell in what degree

								 								Of safety it lies in, or mortality.

								 								And how it may be borne, whether in a right line,

								 								Or a half circle; or may else be cast

								 								Into an angle blunt, if not acute:

								 								And this he will demonstrate. And then, rules

								 								To give and take the lie by.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								How! To take it?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, in oblique he’ll show you, or in circle;

								 								But never in diameter. The whole town

								 								Study his theorems, and dispute them ordinarily

								 								At the eating academies.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								But does he teach

								 								Living by the wits too?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Anything whatever.

								 								You cannot think that subtlety, but he reads it.

								 								He made me a Captain. I was a stark pimp,

								 								Just of your standing, ’fore I met with him;

								 								It is not two months since. I’ll tell you his method:

								 								First, he will enter you at some ordinary.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								No, I’ll not come there: you shall pardon me.





					 						 Face 						 							 								For why, sir?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								There’s gaming there, and tricks.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, would you be

								 								A gallant, and not game?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Ay, ’twill spend a man.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Spend you! It will repair you when you are spent:

								 								How do they live by their wits there, that have vented

								 								Six times your fortunes?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								What, three thousand a-year!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay, forty thousand.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Are there such?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay, sir,

								 								And gallants yet. Here’s a young gentleman

								 								 									Points to Dapper.

								 								Is born to nothing⁠—forty marks a year,

								 								Which I count nothing:⁠—he is to be initiated,

								 								And have a fly of the Doctor. He will win you,

								 								By unresistible luck, within this fortnight,

								 								Enough to buy a barony. They will set him

								 								Upmost, at the Groom porter’s, all the Christmas:

								 								And for the whole year through, at every place,

								 								Where there is play, present him with the chair;

								 								The best attendance, the best drink; sometimes

								 								Two glasses of Canary, and pay nothing;

								 								The purest linen, and the sharpest knife,

								 								The partridge next his trencher: and somewhere

								 								The dainty bed, in private, with the dainty.

								 								You shall have your ordinaries bid for him,

								 								As playhouses for a poet; and the master

								 								Pray him aloud to name what dish he affects,

								 								Which must be buttered shrimps: and those that drink

								 								To no mouth else, will drink to his, as being

								 								The goodly president mouth of all the board.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Do you not gull one?





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Ods my life! Do you think it?

								 								You shall have a cast commander, (can but get

								 								In credit with a glover, or a spurrier,

								 								For some two pair of either’s ware aforehand,)

								 								Will, by most swift posts, dealing with him,

								 								Arrive at competent means to keep himself,

								 								His punk and naked boy, in excellent fashion,

								 								And be admired for’t.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Will the Doctor teach this?





					 						 Face 						 							 								He will do more, sir: when your land is gone,

								 								As men of spirit hate to keep earth long,

								 								In a vacation, when small money is stirring,

								 								And ordinaries suspended till the term,

								 								He’ll show a perspective, where on one side

								 								You shall behold the faces and the persons

								 								Of all sufficient young heirs in town,

								 								Whose bonds are current for commodity;

								 								On th’ other side, the merchants’ forms, and others,

								 								That without help of any second broker,

								 								Who would expect a share, will trust such parcels:

								 								In the third square, the very street and sign

								 								Where the commodity dwells, and does but wait

								 								To be delivered, be it pepper, soap,

								 								Hops, or tobacco, oatmeal, woad, or cheeses.

								 								All which you may so handle, to enjoy

								 								To your own use, and never stand obliged.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								I’faith! Is he such a fellow?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, Nab here knows him.

								 								And then for making matches for rich widows,

								 								Young gentlewomen, heirs, the fortunat’st man!

								 								He’s sent to, far and near, all over England,

								 								To have his counsel, and to know their fortunes.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								God’s will, my sister shall see him.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I’ll tell you, sir,

								 								What he did tell me of Nab. It’s a strange thing:⁠—

								 								By the way, you must eat no cheese, Nab, it breeds melancholy,

								 								And that same melancholy breeds worms; but pass it:⁠—

								 								He told me, honest Nab here was ne’er at tavern

								 								But once in’s life!





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Truth, and no more I was not.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And then he was so sick⁠—





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Could he tell you that too?





					 						 Face 						 							 								How should I know it?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								In troth we had been a-shooting,

								 								And had a piece of fat ram-mutton to supper,

								 								That lay so heavy o’ my stomach⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								And he has no head

								 								To bear any wine; for what with the noise of the fiddlers,

								 								And care of his shop, for he dares keep no servants⁠—





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								My head did so ache⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								And he was fain to be brought home,

								 								The Doctor told me: and then a good old woman⁠—





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, faith, she dwells in Sea-coal Lane⁠—did cure me,

								 								With sodden ale, and pellitory of the wall;

								 								Cost me but twopence. I had another sickness

								 								Was worse than that.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay, that was with the grief

								 								Thou took’st for being ’sessed at eighteen-pence,

								 								For the water-work.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								In truth, and it was like

								 								T’ have cost me almost my life.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Thy hair went off?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir; ’twas done for spite.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, so says the Doctor.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Pray thee, tobacco-boy, go fetch my sister;

								 								I’ll see this learned boy before I go;

								 								And so shall she.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, he is busy now:

								 								But if you have a sister to fetch hither,

								 								Perhaps your own pains may command her sooner;

								 								And he by that time will be free.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								I go.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Drugger, she’s thine: the damask!⁠—





					 						 						 Exit Drugger.

					 						 						 							 								Subtle and I

								 								Must wrestle for her.

								 								 									Aside.

								 								—Come on, master Dapper,

								 								You see how I turn clients here away,

								 								To give your cause dispatch; have you performed

								 								The ceremonies were enjoined you?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Yes, of the vinegar,

								 								And the clean shirt.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Tis well: that shirt may do you

								 								More worship than you think. Your aunt’s afire,

								 								But that she will not show it, t’ have a sight of you.

								 								Have you provided for her Grace’s servants?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Yes, here are six score Edward shillings.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good!





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								And an old Harry’s sovereign.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Very good!





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								And three James shillings, and an Elizabeth groat,

								 								Just twenty nobles.





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, you are too just.

								 								I would you had had the other noble in Marys.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I have some Philip and Marys.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay, those same

								 								Are best of all: where are they? Hark, the Doctor.





					 						 						 Enter Subtle, disguised like a priest of Fairy, with a stripe of cloth.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								In a feigned voice. Is yet her grace’s cousin come?





					 						 Face 						 							 								He is come.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And is he fasting?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And hath cried hum?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Thrice, you must answer.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Thrice.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And as oft buz?





					 						 Face 						 							 								If you have, say.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I have.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Then, to her cuz,

								 								Hoping that he hath vinegared his senses,

								 								As he was bid, the Fairy Queen dispenses,

								 								By me, this robe, the petticoat of fortune;

								 								Which that he straight put on, she doth importune.

								 								And though to fortune near be her petticoat,

								 								Yet nearer is her smock, the Queen doth note:

								 								And therefore, ev’n of that a piece she hath sent

								 								Which, being a child, to wrap him in was rent;

								 								And prays him for a scarf he now will wear it,

								 								With as much love as then her Grace did tear it,

								 								About his eyes, to show he is fortunate.

								 								 									They blind him with the rag.

								 								And, trusting unto her to make his state,

								 								He’ll throw away all worldly pelf about him;

								 								Which that he will perform, she doth not doubt him.





					 						 Face 						 							 								She need not doubt him, sir. Alas, he has nothing,

								 								But what he will part withal as willingly,

								 								Upon her Grace’s word⁠—throw away your purse⁠—

								 								As she would ask it;⁠—handkerchiefs and all⁠—

								 								 									He throws away, as they bid him.

								 								She cannot bid that thing, but he’ll obey.⁠—

								 								If you have a ring about you, cast it off,

								 								Or a silver seal at your wrist; her Grace will send

								 								Her fairies here to search you, therefore deal

								 								Directly with her highness: if they find

								 								That you conceal a mite, you are undone.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Truly, there’s all.





					 						 Face 						 							 								All what?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								My money; truly.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Keep nothing that is transitory about you.

								 								 									Aside to Subtle.

								 								Bid Dol play music.⁠—

								 								 									Dol plays on the cittern within.

								 								Look, the elves are come.

								 								To pinch you, if you tell not truth. Advise you.





					 						 						 							They pinch him.

					 						 Dapper 						 							 								O! I have a paper with a spur-rial in’t.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ti, ti.

								 								They knew’t, they say.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ti, ti, ti, ti. He has more yet.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ti, ti-ti-ti.

								 								 									Aside to Subtle.

								 								In the other pocket.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Titi, titi, titi, titi, titi.

								 								They must pinch him or he will never confess, they say.





					 						 						 							They pinch him again.

					 						 Dapper 						 							 								O, O!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, pray you, hold: he is her Grace’s nephew,

								 								Ti, ti, ti? What care you? Good faith, you shall care.⁠—

								 								Deal plainly, sir, and shame the fairies. Show

								 								You are innocent.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								By this good light, I have nothing.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ti, ti, ti, ti, to, ta. He does equivocate she says:

								 								Ti, ti do ti, ti ti do, ti da;

								 								and swears by the Light when he is blinded.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								By this good Dark, I have nothing but a half-crown

								 								Of gold about my wrist, that my love gave me;

								 								And a leaden heart I wore since she forsook me.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I thought ’twas something. And would you incur

								 								Your aunt’s displeasure for these trifles? Come,

								 								I had rather you had thrown away twenty half-crowns.

								 								 									Takes it off.

								 								You may wear your leaden heart still.⁠—





					 						 						 Enter Dol hastily.

					 						 						 							 								How now!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What news, Dol?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yonder’s your knight, Sir Mammon.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Ods lid, we never thought of him till now!

								 								Where is he?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Here hard by: he is at the door.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And you are not ready now! Dol, get his suit.





					 						 						 Exit Dol.

					 						 						 							 								He must not be sent back.





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, by no means.

								 								What shall we do with this same puffin here,

								 								Now he’s on the spit?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, lay him back awhile,

								 								With some device.





					 						 						 Re-enter Dol, with Face’s clothes.

					 						 						 							 								—Ti, ti, ti, ti, ti, ti, Would her Grace speak with me?

								 								I come.⁠—Help, Dol!





					 						 						 							Knocking without.

					 						 Face 						 							 								 									Speaks through the keyhole.

								 								Who’s there? Sir Epicure,

								 								My master’s in the way. Please you to walk

								 								Three or four turns, but till his back be turned,

								 								And I am for you.⁠—Quickly, Dol!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Her Grace

								 								Commends her kindly to you, master Dapper.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I long to see her Grace.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								She now is set

								 								At dinner in her bed, and she has sent you

								 								From her own private trencher, a dead mouse,

								 								And a piece of gingerbread, to be merry withal,

								 								And stay your stomach, lest you faint with fasting:

								 								Yet if you could hold out till she saw you, she says,

								 								It would be better for you.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, he shall

								 								Hold out, an ’twere this two hours, for her highness;

								 								I can assure you that. We will not lose

								 								All we have done.⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								He must not see, nor speak

								 								To anybody, till then.





					 						 Face 						 							 								For that we’ll put, sir,

								 								A stay in’s mouth.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Of what?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Of gingerbread.

								 								Make you it fit. He that hath pleased her Grace

								 								Thus far, shall not now crinkle for a little.⁠—

								 								Gape, sir, and let him fit you.





					 						 						 							They thrust a gag of gingerbread in his mouth.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Where shall we now

								 								Bestow him?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								In the privy.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Come along, sir,

								 								I now must show you Fortune’s privy lodgings.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Are they perfumed, and his bath ready?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								All:

								 								Only the fumigation’s somewhat strong.





					 						 Face 						 							 								 									Speaking through the keyhole.

								 								Sir Epicure, I am yours, sir, by and by.





					 						 						 							Exeunt with Dapper.





Act IV




Scene I


				A room in Lovewit’s house.

				 					 						 						 Enter Face and Mammon.

					 						 Face 						 							 								O sir, you’re come in the only finest time.⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Where’s master?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Now preparing for projection, sir.

								 								Your stuff will be all changed shortly.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Into gold?





					 						 Face 						 							 								To gold and silver, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Silver I care not for.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, sir, a little to give beggars.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Where’s the lady?





					 						 Face 						 							 								At hand here. I have told her such brave things of you,

								 								Touching your bounty, and your noble spirit⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Hast thou?





					 						 Face 						 							 								As she is almost in her fit to see you.

								 								But, good sir, no divinity in your conference,

								 								For fear of putting her in rage.⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I warrant thee.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Six men [sir] will not hold her down: and then,

								 								If the old man should hear or see you⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Fear not.





					 						 Face 						 							 								The very house, sir, would run mad. You know it,

								 								How scrupulous he is, and violent,

								 								’Gainst the least act of sin. Physic, or mathematics,

								 								Poetry, state, or bawdry, as I told you,

								 								She will endure, and never startle; but

								 								No word of controversy.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I am schooled, good Ulen.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And you must praise her house, remember that,

								 								And her nobility.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Let me alone:

								 								No herald, no, nor antiquary, Lungs,

								 								Shall do it better. Go.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Aside. Why, this is yet

								 								A kind of modern happiness, to have

								 								Dol Common for a great lady.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Now, Epicure,

								 								Heighten thyself, talk to her all in gold;

								 								Rain her as many showers as Jove did drops

								 								Unto his Danae; show the god a miser,

								 								Compared with Mammon. What! The stone will do’t.

								 								She shall feel gold, taste gold, hear gold, sleep gold;

								 								Nay, we will concumbere gold: I will be puissant,

								 								And mighty in my talk to her.⁠—





					 						 						 Re-enter Face, with Dol richly dressed.

					 						 						 							 								Here she comes.





					 						 Face 						 							 								To him, Dol, suckle him.⁠—This is the noble knight,

								 								I told your ladyship⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Madam, with your pardon,

								 								I kiss your vesture.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Sir, I were uncivil

								 								If I would suffer that; my lip to you, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I hope my lord your brother be in health, lady.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								My lord, my brother is, though I no lady, sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Aside. Well said, my Guinea bird.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Right noble madam⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Aside. O, we shall have most fierce idolatry.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								’Tis your prerogative.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Rather your courtesy.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Were there nought else to enlarge your virtues to me,

								 								These answers speak your breeding and your blood.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Blood we boast none, sir, a poor baron’s daughter.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Poor! And gat you? Profane not. Had your father

								 								Slept all the happy remnant of his life

								 								After that act, lien but there still, and panted,

								 								He had done enough to make himself, his issue,

								 								And his posterity noble.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Sir, although

								 								We may be said to want the gilt and trappings,

								 								The dress of honour, yet we strive to keep

								 								The seeds and the materials.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I do see

								 								The old ingredient, virtue, was not lost,

								 								Nor the drug money used to make your compound.

								 								There is a strange nobility in your eye,

								 								This lip, that chin! Methinks you do resemble

								 								One of the Austriac princes.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Very like!

								 								 									Aside.

								 								Her father was an Irish costermonger.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								The house of Valois just had such a nose,

								 								And such a forehead yet the Medici

								 								Of Florence boast.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Troth, and I have been likened

								 								To all these princes.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Aside. I’ll be sworn, I heard it.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I know not how! It is not anyone,

								 								But e’en the very choice of all their features.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Aside. I’ll in, and laugh.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								A certain touch, or air,

								 								That sparkles a divinity, beyond

								 								An earthly beauty!





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								O, you play the courtier.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Good lady, give me leave⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								In faith, I may not,

								 								To mock me, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								To burn in this sweet flame;

								 								The phoenix never knew a nobler death.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Nay, now you court the courtier, and destroy

								 								What you would build. This art, sir, in your words,

								 								Calls your whole faith in question.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								By my soul⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Nay, oaths are made of the same air, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Nature

								 								Never bestowed upon mortality

								 								A more unblamed, a more harmonious feature;

								 								She played the stepdame in all faces else:

								 								Sweet Madam, let me be particular⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Particular, sir! I pray you know your distance.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								In no ill sense, sweet lady; but to ask

								 								How your fair graces pass the hours? I see

								 								You are lodged here, in the house of a rare man,

								 								An excellent artist; but what’s that to you?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yes, sir; I study here the mathematics,

								 								And distillation.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								O, I cry your pardon.

								 								He’s a divine instructor! Can extract

								 								The souls of all things by his art; call all

								 								The virtues, and the miracles of the sun,

								 								Into a temperate furnace; teach dull nature

								 								What her own forces are. A man, the emperor

								 								Has courted above Kelly; sent his medals

								 								And chains, to invite him.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Ay, and for his physic, sir⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Above the art of Aesculapius,

								 								That drew the envy of the thunderer!

								 								I know all this, and more.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Troth, I am taken, sir,

								 								Whole with these studies, that contemplate nature.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								It is a noble humour; but this form

								 								Was not intended to so dark a use.

								 								Had you been crooked, foul, of some coarse mould

								 								A cloister had done well; but such a feature

								 								That might stand up the glory of a kingdom,

								 								To live recluse! Is a mere soloecism,

								 								Though in a nunnery. It must not be.

								 								I muse, my lord your brother will permit it:

								 								You should spend half my land first, were I he.

								 								Does not this diamond better on my finger,

								 								Than in the quarry?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yes.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Why, you are like it.

								 								You were created, lady, for the light.

								 								Here, you shall wear it; take it, the first pledge

								 								Of what I speak, to bind you to believe me.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								In chains of adamant?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Yes, the strongest bands.

								 								And take a secret too⁠—here, by your side,

								 								Doth stand this hour, the happiest man in Europe.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								You are contended, sir!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Nay, in true being,

								 								The envy of princes and the fear of states.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Say you so, Sir Epicure?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Yes, and thou shalt prove it,

								 								Daughter of honour. I have cast mine eye

								 								Upon thy form, and I will rear this beauty

								 								Above all styles.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								You mean no treason, sir?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								No, I will take away that jealousy.

								 								I am the lord of the philosopher’s stone,

								 								And thou the lady.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								How, sir! Have you that?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I am the master of the mystery.

								 								This day the good old wretch here o’ the house

								 								Has made it for us: now he’s at projection.

								 								Think therefore thy first wish now, let me hear it;

								 								And it shall rain into thy lap, no shower,

								 								But floods of gold, whole cataracts, a deluge,

								 								To get a nation on thee.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								You are pleased, sir,

								 								To work on the ambition of our sex.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I am pleased the glory of her sex should know,

								 								This nook, here, of the Friars is no climate

								 								For her to live obscurely in, to learn

								 								Physic and surgery, for the constable’s wife

								 								Of some odd hundred in Essex; but come forth,

								 								And taste the air of palaces; eat, drink

								 								The toils of empirics, and their boasted practice;

								 								Tincture of pearl, and coral, gold, and amber;

								 								Be seen at feasts and triumphs; have it asked,

								 								What miracle she is; set all the eyes

								 								Of court afire, like a burning glass,

								 								And work them into cinders, when the jewels

								 								Of twenty states adorn thee, and the light

								 								Strikes out the stars! That when thy name is mentioned,

								 								Queens may look pale; and we but showing our love,

								 								Nero’s Poppaea may be lost in story!

								 								Thus will we have it.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								I could well consent, sir.

								 								But, in a monarchy, how will this be?

								 								The prince will soon take notice, and both seize

								 								You and your stone, it being a wealth unfit

								 								For any private subject.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								If he knew it.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yourself do boast it, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								To thee, my life.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								O, but beware, sir! You may come to end

								 								The remnants of your days in a loathed prison,

								 								By speaking of it.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								’Tis no idle fear.

								 								We’ll therefore go withal, my girl, and live

								 								In a free state, where we will eat our mullets,

								 								Soused in high-country wines, sup pheasants’ eggs,

								 								And have our cockles boiled in silver shells;

								 								Our shrimps to swim again, as when they lived,

								 								In a rare butter made of dolphins’ milk,

								 								Whose cream does look like opals; and with these

								 								Delicate meats set ourselves high for pleasure,

								 								And take us down again, and then renew

								 								Our youth and strength with drinking the elixir,

								 								And so enjoy a perpetuity

								 								Of life and lust! And thou shalt have thy wardrobe

								 								Richer than nature’s, still to change thyself,

								 								And vary oftener, for thy pride, than she,

								 								Or art, her wise and almost-equal servant.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, you are too loud. I hear you every word

								 								Into the laboratory. Some fitter place;

								 								The garden, or great chamber above. How like you her?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Excellent! Lungs. There’s for thee.





					 						 						 							Gives him money.

					 						 Face 						 							 								But do you hear?

								 								Good sir, beware, no mention of the Rabbins.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								We think not on ’em.





					 						 						 							Exeunt Mammon and Dol.

					 						 Face 						 							 								O, it is well, sir.⁠—Subtle!





					 						 						 Enter Subtle.

					 						 						 							 								Dost thou not laugh?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes; are they gone?





					 						 Face 						 							 								All’s clear.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								The widow is come.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And your quarrelling disciple?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ay.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I must to my captainship again then.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Stay, bring them in first.





					 						 Face 						 							 								So I meant. What is she?

								 								A bonnibel?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I know not.





					 						 Face 						 							 								We’ll draw lots:

								 								You’ll stand to that?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What else?





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, for a suit,

								 								To fall now like a curtain, flap!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								To the door, man.





					 						 Face 						 							 								You’ll have the first kiss, ’cause I am not ready.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, and perhaps hit you through both the nostrils.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within. Who would you speak with?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Within. Where’s the Captain?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within. Gone, sir,

								 								About some business.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Within. Gone!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within. He’ll return straight.

								 								But Master Doctor, his lieutenant, is here.





					 						 						 							Enter Kastril, followed by Dame Pliant.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Come near, my worshipful boy, my terrae fili,

								 								That is, my boy of land; make thy approaches:

								 								Welcome; I know thy lusts, and thy desires,

								 								And I will serve and satisfy them. Begin,

								 								Charge me from thence, or thence, or in this line;

								 								Here is my centre: ground thy quarrel.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								You lie.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How, child of wrath and anger! The loud lie?

								 								For what, my sudden boy?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Nay, that look you to,

								 								I am aforehand.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, this is no true grammar,

								 								And as ill logic! You must render causes, child,

								 								Your first and second intentions, know your canons

								 								And your divisions, moods, degrees, and differences,

								 								Your predicaments, substance, and accident,

								 								Series, extern and intern, with their causes,

								 								Efficient, material, formal, final,

								 								And have your elements perfect.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Aside. What is this?

								 								The angry tongue he talks in?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								That false precept,

								 								Of being aforehand, has deceived a number,

								 								And made them enter quarrels, oftentimes,

								 								Before they were aware; and afterward,

								 								Against their wills.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								How must I do then, sir?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I cry this lady mercy: she should first

								 								Have been saluted.

								 								 									Kisses her.

								 								I do call you lady,

								 								Because you are to be one, ere’t be long,

								 								My soft and buxom widow.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Is she, i’faith?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, or my art is an egregious liar.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								How know you?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								By inspection on her forehead,

								 								And subtlety of her lip, which must be tasted

								 								Often to make a judgment.

								 								 									Kisses her again.

								 								’Slight, she melts

								 								Like a myrobolane:⁠—here is yet a line,

								 								In rivo frontis, tells me he is no knight.





					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								What is he then, sir?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Let me see your hand.

								 								O, your linea fortunae makes it plain;

								 								And stella here in monte Veneris.

								 								But, most of all, junctura annularis.

								 								He is a soldier, or a man of art, lady,

								 								But shall have some great honour shortly.





					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								Brother,

								 								He’s a rare man, believe me!





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face, in his uniform.

					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Hold your peace.

								 								Here comes the t’other rare man.⁠—’Save you, Captain.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good master Kastril! Is this your sister?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Ay, sir.

								 								Please you to kiss her, and be proud to know her.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I shall be proud to know you, lady.





					 						 						 							Kisses her.

					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								Brother,

								 								He calls me lady too.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Ay, peace: I heard it.





					 						 						 							Takes her aside.

					 						 Face 						 							 								The count is come.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Where is he?





					 						 Face 						 							 								At the door.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, you must entertain him.





					 						 Face 						 							 								What will you do

								 								With these the while?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, have them up, and show them

								 								Some fustian book, or the dark glass.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Fore God,

								 								She is a delicate dabchick! I must have her.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Must you! Ay, if your fortune will, you must.⁠—

								 								Come, sir, the Captain will come to us presently:

								 								I’ll have you to my chamber of demonstrations,

								 								Where I will show you both the grammar and logic,

								 								And rhetoric of quarrelling; my whole method

								 								Drawn out in tables; and my instrument,

								 								That hath the several scales upon’t, shall make you

								 								Able to quarrel at a straw’s-breadth by moonlight.

								 								And, lady, I’ll have you look in a glass,

								 								Some half an hour, but to clear your eyesight,

								 								Against you see your fortune; which is greater,

								 								Than I may judge upon the sudden, trust me.





					 						 						 							Exit, followed by Kastril and Dame Pliant.

					 						 						 							Re-enter Face.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Where are you, Doctor?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Within. I’ll come to you presently.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I will have this same widow, now I have seen her,

								 								On any composition.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Subtle.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What do you say?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Have you disposed of them?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I have sent them up.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Subtle, in troth, I needs must have this widow.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Is that the matter?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, but hear me.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Go to.

								 								If you rebel once, Dol shall know it all:

								 								Therefore be quiet, and obey your chance.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, thou art so violent now⁠—Do but conceive,

								 								Thou art old, and canst not serve⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Who cannot? I?

								 								’Slight, I will serve her with thee, for a⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay,

								 								But understand: I’ll give you composition.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I will not treat with thee; what! Sell my fortune?

								 								’Tis better than my birthright. Do not murmur:

								 								Win her, and carry her. If you grumble, Dol

								 								Knows it directly.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Well, sir, I am silent.

								 								Will you go help to fetch in Don in state?





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I follow you, sir. We must keep Face in awe,

								 								Or he will overlook us like a tyrant.





					 						 						 Re-enter Face, introducing Surly disguised as a Spaniard.

					 						 						 							 								Brain of a tailor! Who comes here? Don John!





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Señores, beso las manos a vuestras mercedes.



					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Would you had stooped a little, and kissed our anos!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Peace, Subtle.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Stab me; I shall never hold, man.

								 								He looks in that deep ruff like a head in a platter,

								 								Served in by a short cloak upon two trestles.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Or, what do you say to a collar of brawn, cut down

								 								Beneath the souse, and wriggled with a knife?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Slud, he does look too fat to be a Spaniard.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Perhaps some Fleming or some Hollander got him

								 								In d’Alva’s time; Count Egmont’s bastard.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Don,

								 								Your scurvy, yellow, Madrid face is welcome.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Gratia.



					 						 Subtle 						 							 								He speaks out of a fortification.

								 								Pray God he have no squibs in those deep sets.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Por dios, señores, muy linda casa!



					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What says he?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Praises the house, I think;

								 								I know no more but’s action.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, the casa,

								 								My precious Diego, will prove fair enough

								 								To cozen you in. Do you mark? You shall

								 								Be cozened, Diego.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Cozened, do you see,

								 								My worthy Donzel, cozened.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Entiendo.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Do you intend it? So do we, dear Don.

								 								Have you brought pistolets, or portagues,

								 								My solemn Don?⁠—Dost thou feel any?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Feels his pockets. Full.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You shall be emptied, Don, pumped and drawn

								 								Dry, as they say.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Milked, in troth, sweet Don.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								See all the monsters; the great lion of all, Don.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Con licencia, se puede ver a esta señora?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What talks he now?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Of the Señora.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								O, Don,

								 								This is the lioness, which you shall see

								 								Also, my Don.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Slid, Subtle, how shall we do?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								For what?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why Dol’s employed, you know.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								That’s true.

								 								’Fore heaven, I know not: he must stay, that’s all.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Stay! That he must not by no means.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No! Why?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Unless you’ll mar all. ’Slight, he will suspect it:

								 								And then he will not pay, not half so well.

								 								This is a travelled punk-master, and does know

								 								All the delays; a notable hot rascal,

								 								And looks already rampant.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Sdeath, and Mammon

								 								Must not be troubled.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Mammon! In no case.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								What shall we do then?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Think: you must be sudden.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Entiendo que la señora es tan hermosa, que codicio tan

								 								verla, como la bien aventuranza de mi vida.



					 						 Face 						 							 								Mi vida! ’Slid, Subtle, he puts me in mind of the widow.

								 								What dost thou say to draw her to it, ha!

								 								And tell her ’tis her fortune? All our venture

								 								Now lies upon’t. It is but one man more,

								 								Which of us chance to have her: and beside,

								 								There is no maidenhead to be feared or lost.

								 								What dost thou think on’t, Subtle?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Who? I? Why⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								The credit of our house too is engaged.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You made me an offer for my share erewhile.

								 								What wilt thou give me, i’faith?





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, by that light

								 								I’ll not buy now: You know your doom to me.

								 								E’en take your lot, obey your chance, sir; win her,

								 								And wear her out, for me.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Slight, I’ll not work her then.





					 						 Face 						 							 								It is the common cause; therefore bethink you.

								 								Dol else must know it, as you said.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I care not.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Señores, porque se tarda tanto?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Faith, I am not fit, I am old.





					 						 Face 						 							 								That’s now no reason, sir.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Puede ser de hazer burla de mi amor?





					 						 Face 						 							 								You hear the Don too? By this air, I call,

								 								And loose the hinges: Dol!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								A plague of hell⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Will you then do?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You are a terrible rogue!

								 								I’ll think of this: will you, sir, call the widow?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, and I’ll take her too with all her faults,

								 								Now I do think on’t better.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								With all my heart, sir;

								 								Am I discharged o’ the lot?





					 						 Face 						 							 								As you please.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Hands.





					 						 						 							They take hands.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Remember now, that upon any change,

								 								You never claim her.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Much good joy, and health to you, sir,

								 								Marry a whore! Fate, let me wed a witch first.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Por estas honradas barbas⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								He swears by his beard.

								 								Dispatch, and call the brother too.





					 						 						 							Exit Face.

					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Tengo duda, señores,

								 								 									que no me hagan alguna traycion.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How, issue on? Yes, praesto, sennor. Please you

								 								Enthratha the chambrata, worthy Don:

								 								Where if you please the fates, in your bathada,

								 								You shall be soaked, and stroked, and tubbed and rubbed,

								 								And scrubbed, and fubbed, dear Don, before you go.

								 								You shall in faith, my scurvy baboon Don,

								 								Be curried, clawed, and flawed, and tawed, indeed.

								 								I will the heartlier go about it now,

								 								And make the widow a punk so much the sooner,

								 								To be revenged on this impetuous Face:

								 								The quickly doing of it is the grace.





					 						 						 							Exeunt Subtle and Surly.





Scene II


				Another room in the same.

				 					 						 						 Enter Face, Kastril, and Dame Pliant.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Come, lady: I knew the Doctor would not leave,

								 								Till he had found the very nick of her fortune.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								To be a countess, say you, a Spanish countess, sir?





					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								Why, is that better than an English countess?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Better! ’Slight, make you that a question, lady?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Nay, she is a fool, Captain, you must pardon her.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ask from your courtier, to your inns-of-court-man,

								 								To your mere milliner; they will tell you all,

								 								Your Spanish jennet is the best horse; your Spanish

								 								Stoop is the best garb; your Spanish beard

								 								Is the best cut; your Spanish ruffs are the best

								 								Wear; your Spanish pavan the best dance;

								 								Your Spanish titillation in a glove

								 								The best perfume: and for your Spanish pike,

								 								And Spanish blade, let your poor Captain speak⁠—

								 								Here comes the Doctor.





					 						 						 							Enter Subtle, with a paper.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								My most honoured lady,

								 								For so I am now to style you, having found

								 								By this my scheme, you are to undergo

								 								An honourable fortune, very shortly.

								 								What will you say now, if some⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								I have told her all, sir,

								 								And her right worshipful brother here, that she shall be

								 								A countess; do not delay them, sir; a Spanish countess.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Still, my scarce-worshipful Captain, you can keep

								 								No secret! Well, since he has told you, madam,

								 								Do you forgive him, and I do.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								She shall do that, sir;

								 								I’ll look to it, ’tis my charge.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Well then: nought rests

								 								But that she fit her love now to her fortune.





					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								Truly I shall never brook a Spaniard.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No!





					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								Never since eighty-eight could I abide them,

								 								And that was some three year afore I was born, in truth.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Come, you must love him, or be miserable,

								 								Choose which you will.





					 						 Face 						 							 								By this good rush, persuade her,

								 								She will cry strawberries else within this twelvemonth.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Nay, shads and mackerel, which is worse.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Indeed, sir!





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Od’s lid, you shall love him, or I’ll kick you.





					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								Why,

								 								I’ll do as you will have me, brother.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Do,

								 								Or by this hand I’ll maul you.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, good sir,

								 								Be not so fierce.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No, my enraged child;

								 								She will be ruled. What, when she comes to taste

								 								The pleasures of a countess! To be courted⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								And kissed, and ruffled!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ay, behind the hangings.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And then come forth in pomp!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And know her state!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Of keeping all the idolaters of the chamber

								 								Barer to her, than at their prayers!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Is served

								 								Upon the knee!





					 						 Face 						 							 								And has her pages, ushers,

								 								Footmen, and coaches⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Her six mares⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, eight!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								To hurry her through London, to the Exchange,

								 								Bedlam, the china-houses⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, and have

								 								The citizens gape at her, and praise her tires,

								 								And my lord’s goose-turd bands, that ride with her!





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Most brave! By this hand, you are not my sister,

								 								If you refuse.





					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								I will not refuse, brother.





					 						 						 							Enter Surly.

					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Que es esto, señores, que no venga?

								 								 									Esta tardanza me mata!





					 						 Face 						 							 								It is the Count come:

								 								The Doctor knew he would be here, by his art.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								 									En gallanta madama, Don! Gallantissima!





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Por todos los dioses, la mas acabada

								 								 									hermosura, que he visto en mi vida!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Is’t not a gallant language that they speak?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								An admirable language! Is’t not French?





					 						 Face 						 							 								No, Spanish, sir.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								It goes like law-French,

								 								And that, they say, is the courtliest language.





					 						 Face 						 							 								List, sir.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									El sol ha perdido su lumbre, con el

								 								 									Esplandor que trae esta dama! Válgame Dios!





					 						 Face 						 							 								He admires your sister.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Must not she make curtsey?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Ods will, she must go to him, man, and kiss him!

								 								It is the Spanish fashion, for the women

								 								To make first court.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Tis true he tells you, sir:

								 								His art knows all.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Porqué no se acude?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								He speaks to her, I think.





					 						 Face 						 							 								That he does, sir.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Por el amor de Dios, qué es esto que se tarda?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Nay, see: she will not understand him! Gull,

								 								Noddy.





					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								What say you, brother?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Ass, my sister.

								 								Go kiss him, as the cunning man would have you;

								 								I’ll thrust a pin in your buttocks else.





					 						 Face 						 							 								O no, sir.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Señora mía, mi persona esta muy indigna de

								 								 									Allegara tanta hermosura.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Does he not use her bravely?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Bravely, i’faith!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, he will use her better.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Do you think so?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								 									Señora, si sera servida, entremonos.





					 						 						 							Exit with Dame Pliant.

					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Where does he carry her?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Into the garden, sir;

								 								Take you no thought: I must interpret for her.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Give Dol the word.

								 								 									Aside to Face, who goes out.

								 								—Come, my fierce child, advance,

								 								We’ll to our quarrelling lesson again.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Agreed.

								 								I love a Spanish boy with all my heart.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Nay, and by this means, sir, you shall be brother

								 								To a great count.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Ay, I knew that at first,

								 								This match will advance the house of the Kastrils.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Pray God your sister prove but pliant!





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Why,

								 								Her name is so, by her other husband.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How!





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								The widow Pliant. Knew you not that?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No, faith, sir;

								 								Yet, by erection of her figure, I guessed it.

								 								Come, let’s go practise.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Yes, but do you think, Doctor,

								 								I e’er shall quarrel well?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I warrant you.





					 						 						 							Exeunt.





Scene III


				Another room in the same.

				 					 						 						 Enter Dol in her fit of raving, followed by Mammon.

					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“For after Alexander’s death”⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Good lady⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“That Perdiccas and Antigonus, were slain,

								 								The two that stood, Seleuc’, and Ptolomee”⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Madam⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“Made up the two legs, and the fourth beast,

								 								That was Gog-north, and Egypt-south: which after

								 								Was called Gog-iron-leg and South-iron-leg”⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Lady⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“And then Gog-horned. So was Egypt, too:

								 								Then Egypt-clay-leg, and Gog-clay-leg”⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Sweet madam⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“And last Gog-dust, and Egypt-dust, which fall

								 								In the last link of the fourth chain. And these

								 								Be stars in story, which none see, or look at”⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								What shall I do?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“For,” as he says, “except

								 								We call the Rabbins, and the heathen Greeks”⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Dear lady⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“To come from Salem, and from Athens,

								 								And teach the people of Great Britain”⁠—





					 						 						 							Enter Face, hastily, in his servant’s dress.

					 						 Face 						 							 								What’s the matter, sir?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“To speak the tongue of Eber, and Javan”⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								O,

								 								She’s in her fit.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“We shall know nothing”⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Death, sir,

								 								We are undone!





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“Where then a learned linguist

								 								Shall see the ancient used communion

								 								Of vowels and consonants”⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								My master will hear!





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“A wisdom, which Pythagoras held most high”⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Sweet honourable lady!





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“To comprise

								 								All sounds of voices, in few marks of letters”⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, you must never hope to lay her now.





					 						 						 							They all speak together.

					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								“And so we may arrive by Talmud skill,

								 								And profane Greek, to raise the building up

								 								Of Helen’s house against the Ismaelite,

								 								King of Thogarma, and his habergions

								 								Brimstony, blue, and fiery; and the force

								 								Of king Abaddon, and the beast of Cittim:

								 								Which rabbi David Kimchi, Onkelos,

								 								And Aben Ezra do interpret Rome.”





					 						 Face 						 							 								How did you put her into’t?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Alas, I talked

								 								Of a fifth monarchy I would erect,

								 								With the philosopher’s stone, by chance, and she

								 								Falls on the other four straight.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Out of Broughton!

								 								I told you so. ’Slid, stop her mouth.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Is’t best?





					 						 Face 						 							 								She’ll never leave else. If the old man hear her,

								 								We are but faeces, ashes.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Within. What’s to do there?





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, we are lost! Now she hears him, she is quiet.





					 						 						 							Enter Subtle, they run different ways.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Where shall I hide me!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How! What sight is here?

								 								Close deeds of darkness, and that shun the light!

								 								Bring him again. Who is he? What, my son!

								 								O, I have lived too long.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Nay, good, dear Father,

								 								There was no unchaste purpose.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Not? And flee me

								 								When I come in?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								That was my error.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Error?

								 								Guilt, guilt, my son: give it the right name. No marvel,

								 								If I found check in our great work within,

								 								When such affairs as these were managing!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Why, have you so?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								It has stood still this half hour:

								 								And all the rest of our less works gone back.

								 								Where is the instrument of wickedness,

								 								My lewd false drudge?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Nay, good sir, blame not him;

								 								Believe me, ’twas against his will or knowledge:

								 								I saw her by chance.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Will you commit more sin,

								 								To excuse a varlet?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								By my hope, ’tis true, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Nay, then I wonder less, if you, for whom

								 								The blessing was prepared, would so tempt heaven,

								 								And lose your fortunes.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Why, sir?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								This will retard

								 								The work a month at least.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Why, if it do,

								 								What remedy? But think it not, good Father:

								 								Our purposes were honest.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								As they were,

								 								So the reward will prove.

								 								 									A loud explosion within.

								 								—How now! Ah me!

								 								God, and all saints be good to us.⁠—





					 						 						 Re-enter Face.

					 						 						 							 								What’s that?





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, sir, we are defeated! All the works

								 								Are flown in fumo, every glass is burst;

								 								Furnace, and all rent down, as if a bolt

								 								Of thunder had been driven through the house.

								 								Retorts, receivers, pelicans, bolt-heads,

								 								All struck in shivers!

								 								 									Subtle falls down as in a swoon.

								 								Help, good sir! Alas,

								 								Coldness and death invades him. Nay, Sir Mammon,

								 								Do the fair offices of a man! You stand,

								 								As you were readier to depart than he.

								 								 									Knocking within.

								 								Who’s there? My lord her brother is come.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Ha, Lungs!





					 						 Face 						 							 								His coach is at the door. Avoid his sight,

								 								For he’s as furious as his sister’s mad.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Alas!





					 						 Face 						 							 								My brain is quite undone with the fume, sir,

								 								I ne’er must hope to be mine own man again.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Is all lost, Lungs? Will nothing be preserved

								 								Of all our cost?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Faith, very little, sir;

								 								A peck of coals or so, which is cold comfort, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								O, my voluptuous mind! I am justly punished.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And so am I, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Cast from all my hopes⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, certainties, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								By mine own base affections.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								 									Seeming to come to himself.

								 								O, the curst fruits of vice and lust!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Good Father,

								 								It was my sin. Forgive it.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Hangs my roof

								 								Over us still, and will not fall, O justice,

								 								Upon us, for this wicked man!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, look, sir,

								 								You grieve him now with staying in his sight:

								 								Good sir, the nobleman will come too, and take you,

								 								And that may breed a tragedy.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I’ll go.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay, and repent at home, sir. It may be,

								 								For some good penance you may have it yet;

								 								A hundred pound to the box at Bedlam⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Yes.





					 						 Face 						 							 								For the restoring such as⁠—have their wits.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I’ll do’t.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I’ll send one to you to receive it.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Do.

								 								Is no projection left?





					 						 Face 						 							 								All flown, or stinks, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Will nought be saved that’s good for medicine, think’st thou?





					 						 Face 						 							 								I cannot tell, sir. There will be perhaps,

								 								Something about the scraping of the shards,

								 								Will cure the itch⁠—though not your itch of mind, sir.

								 								 									Aside.

								 								It shall be saved for you, and sent home. Good sir,

								 								This way, for fear the lord should meet you.





					 						 						 							Exit Mammon.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Raising his head. Face!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Is he gone?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, and as heavily

								 								As all the gold he hoped for were in’s blood.

								 								Let us be light though.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Leaping up. Ay, as balls, and bound

								 								And hit our heads against the roof for joy:

								 								There’s so much of our care now cast away.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Now to our Don.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, your young widow by this time

								 								Is made a countess, Face; she has been in travail

								 								Of a young heir for you.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Off with your case,

								 								And greet her kindly, as a bridegroom should,

								 								After these common hazards.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Very well, sir.

								 								Will you go fetch Don Diego off, the while?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And fetch him over too, if you’ll be pleased, sir:

								 								Would Dol were in her place, to pick his pockets now!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, you can do’t as well, if you would set to’t.

								 								I pray you prove your virtue.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								For your sake sir.





					 						 						 							Exeunt.





Scene IV


				Another room in the same.

				 					 						 						 Enter Surly and Dame Pliant.

					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Lady, you see into what hands you are fallen;

								 								’Mongst what a nest of villains! And how near

								 								Your honour was t’ have catched a certain clap,

								 								Through your credulity, had I but been

								 								So punctually forward, as place, time,

								 								And other circumstances would have made a man;

								 								For you’re a handsome woman: would you were wise too!

								 								I am a gentleman come here disguised,

								 								Only to find the knaveries of this citadel;

								 								And where I might have wronged your honour, and have not,

								 								I claim some interest in your love. You are,

								 								They say, a widow, rich: and I’m a bachelor,

								 								Worth nought: your fortunes may make me a man,

								 								As mine have preserved you a woman. Think upon it,

								 								And whether I have deserved you or no.





					 						 Dame Pliant 						 							 								I will, sir.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								And for these household-rogues, let me alone

								 								To treat with them.





					 						 						 							Enter Subtle.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How doth my noble Diego,

								 								And my dear madam Countess? Hath the Count

								 								Been courteous, lady? Liberal, and open?

								 								Donzel, methinks you look melancholic,

								 								After your coitum, and scurvy: truly,

								 								I do not like the dullness of your eye;

								 								It hath a heavy cast, ’tis upsee Dutch,

								 								And says you are a lumpish whoremaster.

								 								Be lighter, and I will make your pockets so.

								 								 									Attempts to pick them.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Throws open his cloak. Will you, don bawd and pickpurse?

								 								 									Strikes him down.

								 								How now! Reel you?

								 								Stand up, sir, you shall find, since I am so heavy,

								 								I’ll give you equal weight.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Help! Murder!





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								No, sir,

								 								There’s no such thing intended: a good cart,

								 								And a clean whip shall ease you of that fear.

								 								I am the Spanish Don “that should be cozened,

								 								Do you see, cozened?” Where’s your Captain Face,

								 								That parcel broker, and whole-bawd, all rascal!





					 						 						 							Enter Face, in his uniform.

					 						 Face 						 							 								How, Surly!





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								O, make your approach, good Captain.

								 								I have found from whence your copper rings and spoons

								 								Come, now, wherewith you cheat abroad in taverns.

								 								’Twas here you learned t’ anoint your boot with brimstone,

								 								Then rub men’s gold on’t for a kind of touch,

								 								And say ’twas naught, when you had changed the colour,

								 								That you might have’t for nothing. And this Doctor,

								 								Your sooty, smoky-bearded compeer, he

								 								Will close you so much gold, in a bolt’s head,

								 								And, on a turn, convey in the stead another

								 								With sublimed mercury, that shall burst in the heat,

								 								And fly out all in fumo! Then weeps Mammon;

								 								Then swoons his worship.





					 						 						 Face slips out.

					 						 						 							 								Or, he is the Faustus,

								 								That casteth figures and can conjure, cures

								 								Plagues, piles, and pox, by the ephemerides,

								 								And holds intelligence with all the bawds

								 								And midwives of three shires: while you send in⁠—

								 								Captain!⁠—what! Is he gone?⁠—damsels with child,

								 								Wives that are barren, or the waiting-maid

								 								With the green sickness.

								 								 									Seizes Subtle as he is retiring.

								 								—Nay, sir, you must tarry,

								 								Though he be ’scaped; and answer by the ears, sir.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face, with Kastril.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Why, now’s the time, if ever you will quarrel

								 								Well, as they say, and be a true-born child:

								 								The Doctor and your sister both are abused.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Where is he? Which is he? He is a slave,

								 								Whate’er he is, and the son of a whore.⁠—Are you

								 								The man, sir, I would know?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								I should be loath, sir,

								 								To confess so much.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Then you lie in your throat.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								How!





					 						 Face 						 							 								To Kastril. A very errant rogue, sir, and a cheater,

								 								Employed here by another conjurer

								 								That does not love the Doctor, and would cross him,

								 								If he knew how.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Sir, you are abused.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								You lie:

								 								And ’tis no matter.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Well said, sir! He is

								 								The impudent’st rascal⁠—





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								You are indeed: Will you hear me, sir?





					 						 Face 						 							 								By no means: bid him be gone.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Begone, sir, quickly.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								This ’s strange!⁠—Lady, do you inform your brother.





					 						 Face 						 							 								There is not such a foist in all the town,

								 								The Doctor had him presently; and finds yet,

								 								The Spanish Count will come here.

								 								 									Aside.

								 								—Bear up, Subtle.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, sir, he must appear within this hour.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And yet this rogue would come in a disguise,

								 								By the temptation of another spirit,

								 								To trouble our art, though he could not hurt it!





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Ay,

								 								I know⁠—

								 								 									To his sister.

								 								Away, you talk like a foolish mauther.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Sir, all is truth she says.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Do not believe him, sir.

								 								He is the lying’st swabber! Come your ways, sir.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								You are valiant out of company!





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Yes, how then, sir?





					 						 						 							Enter Drugger, with a piece of damask.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, here’s an honest fellow, too, that knows him,

								 								And all his tricks. Make good what I say, Abel,

								 								 									Aside to Drugger.

								 								This cheater would have cozened thee o’ the widow.⁠—

								 								He owes this honest Drugger here, seven pound,

								 								He has had on him, in twopenny ’orths of tobacco.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir. And he has damned himself three terms to pay me.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And what does he owe for lotium?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Thirty shillings, sir;

								 								And for six syringes.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Hydra of villainy!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Nay, sir, you must quarrel him out o’ the house.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								I will:

								 								—Sir, if you get not out of doors, you lie;

								 								And you are a pimp.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Why, this is madness, sir,

								 								Not valour in you; I must laugh at this.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								It is my humour: you are a pimp and a trig,

								 								And an Amadis de Gaul, or a Don Quixote.





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Or a knight o’ the curious coxcomb, do you see?





					 						 						 							Enter Ananias.

					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Peace to the household!





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								I’ll keep peace for no man.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Casting of dollars is concluded lawful.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Is he the constable?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Peace, Ananias.





					 						 Face 						 							 								No, sir.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Then you are an otter, and a shad, a whit,

								 								A very tim.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								You’ll hear me, sir?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								I will not.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								What is the motive?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Zeal in the young gentleman,

								 								Against his Spanish slops.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								They are profane,

								 								Lewd, superstitious, and idolatrous breeches.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								New rascals!





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Will you begone, sir?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Avoid, Satan!

								 								Thou art not of the light: That ruff of pride

								 								About thy neck, betrays thee; and is the same

								 								With that which the unclean birds, in seventy-seven,

								 								Were seen to prank it with on divers coasts:

								 								Thou look’st like Antichrist, in that lewd hat.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								I must give way.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Be gone, sir.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								But I’ll take

								 								A course with you⁠—





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Depart, proud Spanish fiend!





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Captain and Doctor.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Child of perdition!





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Hence, sir!⁠—





					 						 						 Exit Surly.

					 						 						 							 								Did I not quarrel bravely?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, indeed, sir.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Nay, an I give my mind to’t, I shall do’t.





					 						 Face 						 							 								O, you must follow, sir, and threaten him tame:

								 								He’ll turn again else.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								I’ll return him then.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 						 Subtle takes Ananias aside.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Drugger, this rogue prevented us for thee:

								 								We had determined that thou should’st have come

								 								In a Spanish suit, and have carried her so; and he,

								 								A brokerly slave! Goes, puts it on himself.

								 								Hast brought the damask?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Thou must borrow

								 								A Spanish suit. Hast thou no credit with the players?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Yes, sir; did you never see me play the Fool?





					 						 Face 						 							 								I know not, Nab: Aside. —Thou shalt, if I can help it.⁠—

								 								Hieronimo’s old cloak, ruff, and hat will serve;

								 								I’ll tell thee more when thou bring’st ’em.





					 						 						 Exit Drugger.

					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Sir, I know

								 								The Spaniard hates the Brethren, and hath spies

								 								Upon their actions: and that this was one

								 								I make no scruple.⁠—But the holy Synod

								 								Have been in prayer and meditation for it;

								 								And ’tis revealed no less to them than me,

								 								That casting of money is most lawful.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								True.

								 								But here I cannot do it: if the house

								 								Should chance to be suspected, all would out,

								 								And we be locked up in the Tower forever,

								 								To make gold there for the state, never come out;

								 								And then are you defeated.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								I will tell

								 								This to the Elders and the weaker Brethren,

								 								That the whole company of the separation

								 								May join in humble prayer again.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And fasting.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Yea, for some fitter place. The peace of mind

								 								Rest with these walls!





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Thanks, courteous Ananias.





					 						 Face 						 							 								What did he come for?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								About casting dollars,

								 								Presently out of hand. And so I told him,

								 								A Spanish minister came here to spy,

								 								Against the faithful⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								I conceive. Come, Subtle,

								 								Thou art so down upon the least disaster!

								 								How wouldst thou ha’ done, if I had not help’t thee out?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I thank thee, Face, for the angry boy, i’faith.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Who would have looked it should have been that rascal,

								 								Surly? He had dyed his beard and all. Well, sir.

								 								Here’s damask come to make you a suit.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Where’s Drugger?





					 						 Face 						 							 								He is gone to borrow me a Spanish habit;

								 								I’ll be the count, now.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								But where’s the widow?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within, with my lord’s sister; Madam Dol

								 								Is entertaining her.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								By your favour, Face,

								 								Now she is honest, I will stand again.





					 						 Face 						 							 								You will not offer it.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Stand to your word,

								 								Or⁠—here comes Dol, she knows⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You are tyrannous still.





					 						 						 							Enter Dol, hastily.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Strict for my right.⁠—How now, Dol!

								 								Hast [thou] told her,

								 								The Spanish count will come?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yes; but another is come,

								 								You little looked for!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Who’s that?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Your master;

								 								The master of the house.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How, Dol!





					 						 Face 						 							 								She lies,

								 								This is some trick. Come, leave your quiblins, Dorothy.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Look out, and see.





					 						 						 							Face goes to the window.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Art thou in earnest?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								’Slight,

								 								Forty of the neighbours are about him, talking.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Tis he, by this good day.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								’Twill prove ill day

								 								For some on us.





					 						 Face 						 							 								We are undone, and taken.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Lost, I’m afraid.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You said he would not come,

								 								While there died one a week within the liberties.





					 						 Face 						 							 								No: ’twas within the walls.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Was’t so! Cry you mercy.

								 								I thought the liberties. What shall we do now, Face?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Be silent: not a word, if he call or knock.

								 								I’ll into mine old shape again and meet him,

								 								Of Jeremy, the butler. In the meantime,

								 								Do you two pack up all the goods and purchase,

								 								That we can carry in the two trunks. I’ll keep him

								 								Off for today, if I cannot longer: and then

								 								At night, I’ll ship you both away to Ratcliff,

								 								Where we will meet tomorrow, and there we’ll share.

								 								Let Mammon’s brass and pewter keep the cellar;

								 								We’ll have another time for that. But, Dol,

								 								’Prythee go heat a little water quickly;

								 								Subtle must shave me: all my Captain’s beard

								 								Must off, to make me appear smooth Jeremy.

								 								You’ll do it?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, I’ll shave you, as well as I can.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And not cut my throat, but trim me?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You shall see, sir.





					 						 						 							Exeunt.





Act V




Scene I


				Before Lovewit’s door.

				 					 						 						 Enter Lovewit, with several of the Neighbours.

					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Has there been such resort, say you?





					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								Daily, sir.





					 						 2 Neighbour 						 							 								And nightly, too.





					 						 3 Neighbour 						 							 								Ay, some as brave as lords.





					 						 4 Neighbour 						 							 								Ladies and gentlewomen.





					 						 5 Neighbour 						 							 								Citizens’ wives.





					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								And knights.





					 						 6 Neighbour 						 							 								In coaches.





					 						 2 Neighbour 						 							 								Yes, and oyster women.





					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								Beside other gallants.





					 						 3 Neighbour 						 							 								Sailors’ wives.





					 						 4 Neighbour 						 							 								Tobacco men.





					 						 5 Neighbour 						 							 								Another Pimlico!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What should my knave advance,

								 								To draw this company? He hung out no banners

								 								Of a strange calf with five legs to be seen,

								 								Or a huge lobster with six claws?





					 						 6 Neighbour 						 							 								No, sir.





					 						 3 Neighbour 						 							 								We had gone in then, sir.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								He has no gift

								 								Of teaching in the nose that e’er I knew of.

								 								You saw no bills set up that promised cure

								 								Of agues, or the toothache?





					 						 2 Neighbour 						 							 								No such thing, sir!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Nor heard a drum struck for baboons or puppets?





					 						 5 Neighbour 						 							 								Neither, sir.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What device should he bring forth now?

								 								I love a teeming wit as I love my nourishment:

								 								’Pray God he have not kept such open house,

								 								That he hath sold my hangings, and my bedding!

								 								I left him nothing else. If he have eat them,

								 								A plague o’ the moth, say I! Sure he has got

								 								Some bawdy pictures to call all this ging!

								 								The friar and the nun; or the new motion

								 								Of the knight’s courser covering the parson’s mare;

								 								Or ’t may be, he has the fleas that run at tilt

								 								Upon a table, or some dog to dance.

								 								When saw you him?





					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								Who, sir, Jeremy?





					 						 2 Neighbour 						 							 								Jeremy butler?

								 								We saw him not this month.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								How!





					 						 4 Neighbour 						 							 								Not these five weeks, sir.





					 						 6 Neighbour 						 							 								These six weeks at the least.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								You amaze me, neighbours!





					 						 5 Neighbour 						 							 								Sure, if your worship know not where he is,

								 								He’s slipt away.





					 						 6 Neighbour 						 							 								Pray God, he be not made away.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Ha! It’s no time to question, then.





					 						 						 							Knocks at the door.

					 						 6 Neighbour 						 							 								About

								 								Some three weeks since, I heard a doleful cry,

								 								As I sat up a mending my wife’s stockings.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								’Tis strange that none will answer! Didst thou hear

								 								A cry, sayst thou?





					 						 6 Neighbour 						 							 								Yes, sir, like unto a man

								 								That had been strangled an hour, and could not speak.





					 						 2 Neighbour 						 							 								I heard it too, just this day three weeks, at two o’clock

								 								Next morning.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								These be miracles, or you make them so!

								 								A man an hour strangled, and could not speak,

								 								And both you heard him cry?





					 						 3 Neighbour 						 							 								Yes, downward, sir.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Thou art a wise fellow. Give me thy hand, I pray thee.

								 								What trade art thou on?





					 						 3 Neighbour 						 							 								A smith, and’t please your worship.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								A smith! Then lend me thy help to get this door open.





					 						 3 Neighbour 						 							 								That I will presently, sir, but fetch my tools⁠—





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								Sir, best to knock again, afore you break it.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								I will. Knocks again.





					 						 						 							Enter Face, in his butler’s livery.

					 						 Face 						 							 								What mean you, sir?





					 						 1, 2, 4 Neighbour 						 							 								O, here’s Jeremy!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Good sir, come from the door.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Why, what’s the matter?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yet farther, you are too near yet.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								In the name of wonder,

								 								What means the fellow!





					 						 Face 						 							 								The house, sir, has been visited.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What, with the plague? Stand thou then farther.





					 						 Face 						 							 								No, sir,

								 								I had it not.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Who had it then? I left

								 								None else but thee in the house.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, sir, my fellow,

								 								The cat that kept the buttery, had it on her

								 								A week before I spied it; but I got her

								 								Conveyed away in the night: and so I shut

								 								The house up for a month⁠—





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								How!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Purposing then, sir,

								 								To have burnt rose-vinegar, treacle, and tar,

								 								And have made it sweet, that you should ne’er have known it;

								 								Because I knew the news would but afflict you, sir.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Breathe less, and farther off! Why this is stranger:

								 								The neighbours tell me all here that the doors

								 								Have still been open⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								How, sir!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Gallants, men and women,

								 								And of all sorts, tag-rag, been seen to flock here

								 								In threaves, these ten weeks, as to a second Hogsden,

								 								In days of Pimlico and Eye-bright.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir,

								 								Their wisdoms will not say so.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Today they speak

								 								Of coaches and gallants; one in a French hood

								 								Went in, they tell me; and another was seen

								 								In a velvet gown at the window: divers more

								 								Pass in and out.





					 						 Face 						 							 								They did pass through the doors then,

								 								Or walls, I assure their eyesights, and their spectacles;

								 								For here, sir, are the keys, and here have been,

								 								In this my pocket, now above twenty days:

								 								And for before, I kept the fort alone there.

								 								But that ’tis yet not deep in the afternoon,

								 								I should believe my neighbours had seen double

								 								Through the black pot, and made these apparitions!

								 								For, on my faith to your worship, for these three weeks

								 								And upwards the door has not been opened.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Strange!





					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								Good faith, I think I saw a coach.





					 						 2 Neighbour 						 							 								And I too,

								 								I’d have been sworn.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Do you but think it now?

								 								And but one coach?





					 						 4 Neighbour 						 							 								We cannot tell, sir: Jeremy

								 								Is a very honest fellow.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Did you see me at all?





					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								No; that we are sure on.





					 						 2 Neighbour 						 							 								I’ll be sworn o’ that.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Fine rogues to have your testimonies built on!





					 						 						 							Re-enter 3 Neighbour, with his tools.

					 						 3 Neighbour 						 							 								Is Jeremy come!





					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								O yes; you may leave your tools;

								 								We were deceived, he says.





					 						 2 Neighbour 						 							 								He has had the keys;

								 								And the door has been shut these three weeks.





					 						 3 Neighbour 						 							 								Like enough.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Peace, and get hence, you changelings.





					 						 						 							Enter Surly and Mammon.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Aside. Surly come!

								 								And Mammon made acquainted! They’ll tell all.

								 								How shall I beat them off? What shall I do?

								 								Nothing’s more wretched than a guilty conscience.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								No, sir, he was a great physician. This,

								 								It was no bawdyhouse, but a mere chancel!

								 								You knew the lord and his sister.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Nay, good Surly.⁠—





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								The happy word, Be Rich⁠—





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Play not the tyrant.⁠—





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								“Should be today pronounced to all your friends.”

								 								And where be your andirons now? And your brass pots,

								 								That should have been golden flagons, and great wedges?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Let me but breathe. What, they have shut their doors,

								 								Methinks!





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Ay, now ’tis holiday with them.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Rogues,

								 								 									He and Surly knock.

								 								Cozeners, imposters, bawds!





					 						 Face 						 							 								What mean you, sir?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								To enter if we can.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Another man’s house!

								 								Here is the owner, sir: turn you to him,

								 								And speak your business.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Are you, sir, the owner?





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								And are those knaves within your cheaters!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What knaves, what cheaters?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Subtle and his Lungs.





					 						 Face 						 							 								The gentleman is distracted, sir! No lungs,

								 								Nor lights have been seen here these three weeks, sir,

								 								Within these doors, upon my word.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Your word,

								 								Groom arrogant!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes, sir, I am the housekeeper,

								 								And know the keys have not been out of my hands.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								This is a new Face.





					 						 Face 						 							 								You do mistake the house, sir:

								 								What sign was’t at?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								You rascal! This is one

								 								Of the confederacy. Come, let’s get officers,

								 								And force the door.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								’Pray you stay, gentlemen.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								No, sir, we’ll come with warrant.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Ay, and then

								 								We shall have your doors open.





					 						 						 							Exeunt Mammon and Surly.

					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What means this?





					 						 Face 						 							 								I cannot tell, sir.





					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								These are two of the gallants

								 								That we do think we saw.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Two of the fools!

								 								Your talk as idly as they. Good faith, sir,

								 								I think the moon has crazed ’em all.⁠—

								 								 									Aside.

								 								O me,





					 						 						 Enter Kastril.

					 						 						 							 								The angry boy come too! He’ll make a noise,

								 								And ne’er away till he have betrayed us all.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								 									Knocking.

								 								 What rogues, bawds, slaves, you’ll open the door, anon!

								 								Punk, cockatrice, my sister! By this light

								 								I’ll fetch the marshal to you. You are a whore

								 								To keep your castle⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Who would you speak with, sir?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								The bawdy Doctor, and the cozening Captain,

								 								And puss my sister.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								This is something, sure.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Upon my trust, the doors were never open, sir.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								I have heard all their tricks told me twice over,

								 								By the fat knight and the lean gentleman.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Here comes another.





					 						 						 							Enter Ananias and Tribulation.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Ananias too!

								 								And his pastor!





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								 									Beating at the door.

								 								The doors are shut against us.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Come forth, you seed of sulphur, sons of fire!

								 								Your stench it is broke forth; abomination

								 								Is in the house.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Ay, my sister’s there.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								The place,

								 								It is become a cage of unclean birds.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Yes, I will fetch the scavenger, and the constable.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								You shall do well.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								We’ll join to weed them out.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								You will not come then, punk devise, my sister!





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Call her not sister; she’s a harlot verily.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								I’ll raise the street.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Good gentlemen, a word.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Satan avoid, and hinder not our zeal!





					 						 						 							Exeunt Ananias, Tribulation, and Kastril.

					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								The world’s turned Bedlam.





					 						 Face 						 							 								These are all broke loose,

								 								Out of St. Katherine’s, where they use to keep

								 								The better sort of mad-folks.





					 						 1 Neighbour 						 							 								All these persons

								 								We saw go in and out here.





					 						 2 Neighbour 						 							 								Yes, indeed, sir.





					 						 3 Neighbour 						 							 								These were the parties.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Peace, you drunkards! Sir,

								 								I wonder at it: please you to give me leave

								 								To touch the door, I’ll try an the lock be changed.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								It mazes me!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Goes to the door. Good faith, sir, I believe

								 								There’s no such thing: ’tis all deceptio visus.⁠—

								 								 									Aside.

								 								Would I could get him away.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Within. Master Captain! Master Doctor!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Who’s that?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Aside. Our clerk within, that I forgot!

								 								I know not, sir.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Within. For God’s sake, when will her Grace be at leisure?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ha!

								 								Illusions, some spirit o’ the air⁠—

								 								Aside. His gag is melted,

								 								And now he sets out the throat.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Within. I am almost stifled⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								Aside. Would you were altogether.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								’Tis in the house.

								 								Ha! List.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Believe it, sir, in the air.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Peace, you.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Within. Mine aunt’s Grace does not use me well.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Within. You fool,

								 								Peace, you’ll mar all.





					 						 Face 						 							 								 									Speaks through the keyhole, while Lovewit advances to the door unobserved.

								 								Or you will else, you rogue.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								O, is it so? Then you converse with spirits!⁠—

								 								Come, sir. No more of your tricks, good Jeremy.

								 								The truth, the shortest way.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Dismiss this rabble, sir.⁠—

								 								Aside. What shall I do? I am catched.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Good neighbours,

								 								I thank you all. You may depart.





					 						 						 Exeunt Neighbours.

					 						 						 							 								—Come, sir,

								 								You know that I am an indulgent master;

								 								And therefore conceal nothing. What’s your medicine,

								 								To draw so many several sorts of wild fowl?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, you were wont to affect mirth and wit⁠—

								 								But here’s no place to talk on’t in the street.

								 								Give me but leave to make the best of my fortune,

								 								And only pardon me the abuse of your house:

								 								It’s all I beg. I’ll help you to a widow,

								 								In recompence, that you shall give me thanks for,

								 								Will make you seven years younger, and a rich one.

								 								’Tis but your putting on a Spanish cloak:

								 								I have her within. You need not fear the house;

								 								It was not visited.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								But by me, who came

								 								Sooner than you expected.





					 						 Face 						 							 								It is true, sir.

								 								’Pray you forgive me.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Well: let’s see your widow.





					 						 						 							Exeunt.





Scene II


				A room in the same.

				 					 						 						 Enter Subtle, leading in Dapper, with his eyes bound as before.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								How! You have eaten your gag?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Yes faith, it crumbled

								 								Away in my mouth.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You have spoiled all then.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								No!

								 								I hope my aunt of Fairy will forgive me.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Your aunt’s a gracious lady; but in troth

								 								You were to blame.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								The fume did overcome me,

								 								And I did do’t to stay my stomach. ’Pray you

								 								So satisfy her Grace.





					 						 						 Enter Face, in his uniform.

					 						 						 							 								Here comes the Captain.





					 						 Face 						 							 								How now! Is his mouth down?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Ay, he has spoken!





					 						 Face 						 							 								A pox, I heard him, and you too.⁠—He’s undone then.⁠—

								 								I have been fain to say, the house is haunted

								 								With spirits, to keep churl back.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And hast thou done it?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Sure, for this night.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Why, then triumph and sing

								 								Of Face so famous, the precious king

								 								Of present wits.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Did you not hear the coil

								 								About the door?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, and I dwindled with it.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Show him his aunt, and let him be dispatched:

								 								I’ll send her to you.





					 						 						 							Exit Face.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Well, sir, your aunt her Grace

								 								Will give you audience presently, on my suit,

								 								And the Captain’s word that you did not eat your gag

								 								In any contempt of her Highness.





					 						 						 							Unbinds his eyes.

					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Not I, in troth, sir.





					 						 						 							Enter Dol, like the Queen of Fairy.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Here she is come. Down o’ your knees and wriggle:

								 								She has a stately presence.

								 								 									Dapper kneels, and shuffles towards her.

								 								Good! Yet nearer,

								 								And bid, God save you!





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Madam!





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And your aunt.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								And my most gracious aunt, God save your Grace.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Nephew, we thought to have been angry with you;

								 								But that sweet face of yours hath turned the tide,

								 								And made it flow with joy, that ebbed of love.

								 								Arise, and touch our velvet gown.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								The skirts,

								 								And kiss ’em. So!





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Let me now stroke that head.

								 								“Much, nephew, shalt thou win, much shalt thou spend,

								 								Much shalt thou give away, much shalt thou lend.”





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Aside. Ay, much! Indeed.⁠—Why do you not thank her Grace?





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I cannot speak for joy.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								See, the kind wretch!

								 								Your Grace’s kinsman right.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Give me the bird.

								 								Here is your fly in a purse, about your neck, cousin;

								 								Wear it, and feed it about this day sev’n-night,

								 								On your right wrist⁠—





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Open a vein with a pin,

								 								And let it suck but once a week; till then,

								 								You must not look on’t.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								No: and kinsman,

								 								Bear yourself worthy of the blood you come on.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Her Grace would have you eat no more Woolsack pies,

								 								Nor Dagger frumety.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Nor break his fast

								 								In Heaven and Hell.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								She’s with you everywhere!

								 								Nor play with costermongers, at mum-chance, tray-trip,

								 								God make you rich; (when as your aunt has done it);

								 								But keep

								 								The gallantest company, and the best games⁠—





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Yes, sir.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Gleek and primero; and what you get, be true to us.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								By this hand, I will.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You may bring’s a thousand pound

								 								Before tomorrow night, if but three thousand

								 								Be stirring, an you will.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I swear I will then.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Your fly will learn you all games.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Within. Have you done there?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Your Grace will command him no more duties?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								No:

								 								But come, and see me often. I may chance

								 								To leave him three or four hundred chests of treasure,

								 								And some twelve thousand acres of Fairyland,

								 								If he game well and comely with good gamesters.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								There’s a kind aunt! Kiss her departing part.⁠—

								 								But you must sell your forty mark a year, now.





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								Ay, sir, I mean.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Or, give’t away; pox on’t!





					 						 Dapper 						 							 								I’ll give’t mine aunt. I’ll go and fetch the writings.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								’Tis well⁠—away!





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Where’s Subtle?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Here: what news?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Drugger is at the door, go take his suit,

								 								And bid him fetch a parson, presently;

								 								Say, he shall marry the widow. Thou shalt spend

								 								A hundred pound by the service!





					 						 						 Exit Subtle.

					 						 						 							 								Now, queen Dol,

								 								Have you packed up all?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yes.





					 						 Face 						 							 								And how do you like

								 								The lady Pliant?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								A good dull innocent.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Subtle.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Here’s your Hieronimo’s cloak and hat.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Give me them.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								And the ruff too?





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes; I’ll come to you presently.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Now he is gone about his project, Dol,

								 								I told you of, for the widow.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								’Tis direct

								 								Against our articles.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Well, we will fit him, wench.

								 								Hast thou gulled her of her jewels or her bracelets?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								No; but I will do’t.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Soon at night, my Dolly,

								 								When we are shipped, and all our goods aboard,

								 								Eastward for Ratcliff, we will turn our course

								 								To Brainford, westward, if thou sayst the word,

								 								And take our leaves of this o’er-weening rascal,

								 								This peremptory Face.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Content, I’m weary of him.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Thou’st cause, when the slave will run a wiving, Dol,

								 								Against the instrument that was drawn between us.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								I’ll pluck his bird as bare as I can.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, tell her,

								 								She must by any means address some present

								 								To the cunning man, make him amends for wronging

								 								His art with her suspicion; send a ring,

								 								Or chain of pearl; she will be tortured else

								 								Extremely in her sleep, say, and have strange things

								 								Come to her. Wilt thou?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yes.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								My fine flitter-mouse,

								 								My bird o’ the night! We’ll tickle it at the Pigeons,

								 								When we have all, and may unlock the trunks,

								 								And say, this’s mine, and thine; and thine, and mine.





					 						 						 							They kiss.

					 						 						 Re-enter Face.

					 						 Face 						 							 								What now! A billing?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes, a little exalted

								 								In the good passage of our stock-affairs.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Drugger has brought his parson; take him in, Subtle,

								 								And send Nab back again to wash his face.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								I will: and shave himself?





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Face 						 							 								If you can get him.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								You are hot upon it, Face, whate’er it is!





					 						 Face 						 							 								A trick that Dol shall spend ten pound a month by.





					 						 						 Re-enter Subtle.

					 						 						 							 								Is he gone?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								The chaplain waits you in the hall, sir.





					 						 Face 						 							 								I’ll go bestow him.





					 						 						 							Exit.

					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								He’ll now marry her, instantly.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								He cannot yet, he is not ready. Dear Dol,

								 								Cozen her of all thou canst. To deceive him

								 								Is no deceit, but justice, that would break

								 								Such an inextricable tie as ours was.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Let me alone to fit him.





					 						 						 							Re-enter Face.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Come, my venturers,

								 								You have packed up all? Where be the trunks? Bring forth.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Here.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Let us see them. Where’s the money?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Here,

								 								In this.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Mammon’s ten pound; eight score before:

								 								The Brethren’s money, this. Drugger’s and Dapper’s.

								 								What paper’s that?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								The jewel of the waiting maid’s,

								 								That stole it from her lady, to know certain⁠—





					 						 Face 						 							 								If she should have precedence of her mistress?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yes.





					 						 Face 						 							 								What box is that?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								The fishwives’ rings, I think,

								 								And the alewives’ single money. Is’t not, Dol?





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Yes; and the whistle that the sailor’s wife

								 								Brought you to know an her husband were with Ward.





					 						 Face 						 							 								We’ll wet it tomorrow; and our silver-beakers

								 								And tavern cups. Where be the French petticoats,

								 								And girdles and hangers?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Here, in the trunk,

								 								And the bolts of lawn.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Is Drugger’s damask there,

								 								And the tobacco?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Yes.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Give me the keys.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Why you the keys?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								No matter, Dol; because

								 								We shall not open them before he comes.





					 						 Face 						 							 								’Tis true, you shall not open them, indeed;

								 								Nor have them forth, do you see? Not forth, Dol.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								No!





					 						 Face 						 							 								No, my smock rampant. The right is, my master

								 								Knows all, has pardoned me, and he will keep them;

								 								Doctor, ’tis true⁠—you look⁠—for all your figures:

								 								I sent for him, indeed. Wherefore, good partners,

								 								Both he and she be satisfied; for here

								 								Determines the indenture tripartite

								 								’Twixt Subtle, Dol, and Face. All I can do

								 								Is to help you over the wall, o’ the backside,

								 								Or lend you a sheet to save your velvet gown, Dol.

								 								Here will be officers presently, bethink you

								 								Of some course suddenly to ’scape the dock:

								 								For thither you will come else.

								 								 									Loud knocking.

								 								Hark you, thunder.





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								You are a precious fiend!





					 						 Officer 						 							 								Without. Open the door.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Dol, I am sorry for thee i’faith; but hear’st thou?

								 								It shall go hard but I will place thee somewhere:

								 								Thou shalt have my letter to mistress Amo⁠—





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Hang you!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Or madam Caesarean.





					 						 Dol Common 						 							 								Pox upon you, rogue,

								 								Would I had but time to beat thee!





					 						 Face 						 							 								Subtle,

								 								Let’s know where you set up next; I will send you

								 								A customer now and then, for old acquaintance:

								 								What new course have you?





					 						 Subtle 						 							 								Rogue, I’ll hang myself;

								 								That I may walk a greater devil than thou,

								 								And haunt thee in the flock-bed and the buttery.





					 						 						 							Exeunt.





Scene III


				An outer room in the same.

				 					 						 						 Enter Lovewit in the Spanish dress, with the Parson. Loud knocking at the door.

					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What do you mean, my masters?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Without. Open your door,

								 								Cheaters, bawds, conjurers.





					 						 Officer 						 							 								Without. Or we will break it open.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What warrant have you?





					 						 Officer 						 							 								Without. Warrant enough, sir, doubt not,

								 								If you’ll not open it.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Is there an officer, there?





					 						 Officer 						 							 								Without. Yes, two or three for failing.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Have but patience,

								 								And I will open it straight.





					 						 						 							Enter Face, as butler.

					 						 Face 						 							 								Sir, have you done?

								 								Is it a marriage? Perfect?





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Yes, my brain.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Off with your ruff and cloak then; be yourself, sir.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Without. Down with the door.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Without. ’Slight, ding it open.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Opening the door. Hold,

								 								Hold, gentlemen, what means this violence?





					 						 						 Mammon, Surly, Kastril, Ananias, Tribulation, and Officers, rush in.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Where is this collier?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								And my Captain Face?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								These day owls.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								That are birding in men’s purses.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Madam Suppository.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Doxy, my sister.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Locusts

								 								Of the foul pit.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Profane as Bel and the dragon.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Worse than the grasshoppers, or the lice of Egypt.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Good gentlemen, hear me. Are you officers,

								 								And cannot stay this violence?





					 						 1 Officer 						 							 								Keep the peace.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Gentlemen, what is the matter? Whom do you seek?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								The chemical cozener.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								And the Captain pander.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								The nun my sister.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Madam Rabbi.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Scorpions,

								 								And caterpillars.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Fewer at once, I pray you.





					 						 2 Officer 						 							 								One after another, gentlemen, I charge you,

								 								By virtue of my staff.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								They are the vessels

								 								Of pride, lust, and the cart.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Good zeal, lie still

								 								A little while.





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Peace, deacon Ananias.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								The house is mine here, and the doors are open;

								 								If there be any such persons as you seek for,

								 								Use your authority, search on o’ God’s name.

								 								I am but newly come to town, and finding

								 								This tumult ’bout my door, to tell you true,

								 								It somewhat mazed me; till my man, here, fearing

								 								My more displeasure, told me he had done

								 								Somewhat an insolent part, let out my house

								 								(Belike, presuming on my known aversion

								 								From any air o’ the town while there was sickness,)

								 								To a Doctor and a Captain: who, what they are

								 								Or where they be, he knows not.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Are they gone?





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								You may go in and search, sir.





					 						 						 Mammon, Ananias, and Tribulation go in.

					 						 						 							 								Here, I find

								 								The empty walls worse than I left them, smoked,

								 								A few cracked pots, and glasses, and a furnace:

								 								The ceiling filled with poesies of the candle,

								 								And madam with a dildo writ o’ the walls:

								 								Only one gentlewoman, I met here,

								 								That is within, that said she was a widow⁠—





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Ay, that’s my sister; I’ll go thump her. Where is she?





					 						 						 							Goes in.

					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								And should have married a Spanish Count, but he,

								 								When he came to’t, neglected her so grossly,

								 								That I, a widower, am gone through with her.





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								How! Have I lost her then?





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Were you the Don, sir?

								 								Good faith, now, she does blame you extremely, and says

								 								You swore, and told her you had taken the pains

								 								To dye your beard, and umber o’er your face,

								 								Borrowed a suit, and ruff, all for her love;

								 								And then did nothing. What an oversight,

								 								And want of putting forward, sir, was this!

								 								Well fare an old harquebuzier, yet,

								 								Could prime his powder, and give fire, and hit,

								 								All in a twinkling!





					 						 						 							Re-enter Mammon.

					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								The whole nest are fled!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What sort of birds were they?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								A kind of choughs,

								 								Or thievish daws, sir, that have picked my purse

								 								Of eight score and ten pounds within these five weeks,

								 								Beside my first materials; and my goods,

								 								That lie in the cellar, which I am glad they have left,

								 								I may have home yet.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Think you so, sir?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Ay.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								By order of law, sir, but not otherwise.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Not mine own stuff!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Sir, I can take no knowledge

								 								That they are yours, but by public means.

								 								If you can bring certificate that you were gulled of them,

								 								Or any formal writ out of a court,

								 								That you did cozen yourself, I will not hold them.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I’ll rather lose them.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								That you shall not, sir,

								 								By me, in troth: upon these terms, they are yours.

								 								What! Should they have been, sir, turned into gold, all?





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								No,

								 								I cannot tell⁠—It may be they should.⁠—What then?





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What a great loss in hope have you sustained!





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								Not I, the Commonwealth has.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Ay, he would have built

								 								The city new; and made a ditch about it

								 								Of silver, should have run with cream from Hogsden;

								 								That every Sunday, in Moorfields, the younkers,

								 								And tits and tomboys should have fed on, gratis.





					 						 Sir Epicure Mammon 						 							 								I will go mount a turnip-cart, and preach

								 								The end of the world, within these two months. Surly,

								 								What! In a dream?





					 						 Pertinax Surly 						 							 								Must I needs cheat myself,

								 								With that same foolish vice of honesty!

								 								Come, let us go and hearken out the rogues:

								 								That Face I’ll mark for mine, if e’er I meet him.





					 						 Face 						 							 								If I can hear of him, sir, I’ll bring you word,

								 								Unto your lodging; for in troth, they were strangers

								 								To me, I thought them honest as myself, sir.





					 						 						 							Exeunt Mammon and Surly.

					 						 						 Re-enter Ananias and Tribulation.

					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								’Tis well, the saints shall not lose all yet. Go,

								 								And get some carts⁠—





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								For what, my zealous friends?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								To bear away the portion of the righteous

								 								Out of this den of thieves.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What is that portion?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								The goods sometimes the orphan’s, that the Brethren

								 								Bought with their silver pence.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What, those in the cellar,

								 								The knight Sir Mammon claims?





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								I do defy

								 								The wicked Mammon, so do all the Brethren,

								 								Thou profane man! I ask thee with what conscience

								 								Thou canst advance that idol against us,

								 								That have the seal? Were not the shillings numbered,

								 								That made the pounds; were not the pounds told out,

								 								Upon the second day of the fourth week,

								 								In the eighth month, upon the table dormant,

								 								The year of the last patience of the saints,

								 								Six hundred and ten?





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Mine earnest vehement botcher,

								 								And deacon also, I cannot dispute with you:

								 								But if you get you not away the sooner,

								 								I shall confute you with a cudgel.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								Sir!





					 						 Tribulation Wholesome 						 							 								Be patient, Ananias.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								I am strong,

								 								And will stand up, well girt, against an host

								 								That threaten Gad in exile.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								I shall send you

								 								To Amsterdam, to your cellar.





					 						 Ananias 						 							 								I will pray there,

								 								Against thy house: may dogs defile thy walls,

								 								And wasps and hornets breed beneath thy roof,

								 								This seat of falsehood, and this cave of cozenage!





					 						 						 							Exeunt Ananias and Tribulation.

					 						 						 Enter Drugger.

					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Another too?





					 						 Drugger 						 							 								Not I, sir, I am no Brother.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Beats him. Away, you Harry Nicholas! Do you talk?





					 						 						 							Exit Drugger.

					 						 Face 						 							 								No, this was Abel Drugger. Good sir, go,





					 						 						 							To the Parson.

					 						 						 							 								And satisfy him; tell him all is done:

								 								He stayed too long a washing of his face.

								 								The Doctor, he shall hear of him at Westchester;

								 								And of the Captain, tell him, at Yarmouth, or

								 								Some good port town else, lying for a wind.





					 						 						 Exit Parson.

					 						 						 							 								If you can get off the angry child, now, sir⁠—





					 						 						 							Enter Kastril, dragging in his sister.

					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Come on, you ewe, you have matched most sweetly,

								 								have you not?

								 								Did not I say, I would never have you tupped

								 								But by a dubbed boy, to make you a lady tom?

								 								’Slight, you are a mammet! O, I could touse you, now.

								 								Death, mun’ you marry, with a pox!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								You lie, boy;

								 								As sound as you; and I’m aforehand with you.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Anon!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Come, will you quarrel? I will feize you, sirrah;

								 								Why do you not buckle to your tools?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Od’s light,

								 								This is a fine old boy as e’er I saw!





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								What, do you change your copy now? Proceed;

								 								Here stands my dove: stoop at her, if you dare.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								’Slight, I must love him! I cannot choose, i’faith,

								 								An I should be hanged for’t! Sister, I protest,

								 								I honour thee for this match.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								O, do you so, sir?





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								Yes, an thou canst take tobacco and drink, old boy,

								 								I’ll give her five hundred pound more to her marriage,

								 								Than her own state.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Fill a pipe full, Jeremy.





					 						 Face 						 							 								Yes; but go in and take it, sir.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								We will⁠—

								 								I will be ruled by thee in anything, Jeremy.





					 						 Kastril 						 							 								’Slight, thou art not hidebound, thou art a jovy boy!

								 								Come, let us in, I pray thee, and take our whiffs.





					 						 Lovewit 						 							 								Whiff in with your sister, brother boy.





					 						 						 Exeunt Kastril and Dame Pliant.

					 						 						 							 								That master

								 								That had received such happiness by a servant,

								 								In such a widow, and with so much wealth,

								 								Were very ungrateful, if he would not be

								 								A little indulgent to that servant’s wit,

								 								And help his fortune, though with some small strain

								 								Of his own candour.

								 								 									Advancing.

								 								—“Therefore, gentlemen,

								 								And kind spectators, if I have outstript

								 								An old man’s gravity, or strict canon, think

								 								What a young wife and a good brain may do;

								 								Stretch age’s truth sometimes, and crack it too.

								 								Speak for thyself, knave.”





					 						 Face 						 							 								“So I will, sir.”





					 						 						 Advancing to the front of the stage.

					 						 						 							 								“Gentlemen,

								 								My part a little fell in this last scene,

								 								Yet ’twas decorum. And though I am clean

								 								Got off from Subtle, Surly, Mammon, Dol,

								 								Hot Ananias, Dapper, Drugger, all

								 								With whom I traded: yet I put myself

								 								On you, that are my country: and this pelf

								 								Which I have got, if you do quit me, rests

								 								To feast you often, and invite new guests.”





				 				 			 			The Alchemist

			was published in 1612 by

			Ben Jonson.

			This ebook was produced for the

			Standard Ebooks project

			by

			B. Timothy Keith,

			and is based on a transcription produced in 2003 by

			Amy E. Zelmer, Robert Prince, Sue Asscher, and David Widger

			for

			Project Gutenberg

			and on digital scans available at the

			Internet Archive.

			The cover page is adapted from

			Merrymakers at Shrovetide,

			a painting completed between 1616–17 by

			Frans Hals.

			The cover and title pages feature the

			League Spartan and Sorts Mill Goudy

			typefaces created in 2014 and 2009 by

			The League of Moveable Type.

			The first edition of this ebook was released on

			April 12, 2019, 10:10 p.m.

			You can check for updates to this ebook, view its revision history, or download it for different ereading systems at

			standardebooks.org/ebooks/ben-jonson/the-alchemist.

			The volunteer-driven Standard Ebooks project relies on readers like you to submit typos, corrections, and other improvements. Anyone can contribute at standardebooks.org.





Uncopyright


			 				 					May you do good and not evil.

					 					May you find forgiveness for yourself and forgive others.

					 					May you share freely, never taking more than you give.





			Copyright pages exist to tell you can’t do something. Unlike them, this Uncopyright page exists to tell you, among other things, that the writing and artwork in this ebook are believed to be in the U.S. public domain. The U.S. public domain represents our collective cultural heritage, and items in it are free for anyone in the U.S. to do almost anything at all with, without having to get permission. Public domain items are free of copyright restrictions.

			Copyright laws are different around the world. If you’re not located in the U.S., check with your local laws before using this ebook.

			Non-authorship activities performed on public domain items⁠—so-called “sweat of the brow” work⁠—don’t create a new copyright. That means nobody can claim a new copyright on a public domain item for work like digitization, markup, or typography. Regardless, to dispel any possible doubt on the copyright status of this ebook, Standard Ebooks and its contributors release this ebook under the terms in the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication, thus dedicating to the worldwide public domain all of the work they’ve done on this ebook, including but not limited to metadata, the titlepage, imprint, colophon, this Uncopyright, and any changes or enhancements to, or markup on, the original text and artwork. This dedication doesn’t change the copyright status of the underlying works, which, though believed to already be in the U.S. public domain, may not yet be in the public domain of other countries. We make this dedication in the interest of enriching our global cultural heritage, to promote free and libre culture around the world, and to give back to the unrestricted culture that has given all of us so much.

			 				Standard Ebooks and its contributors offer this ebook as-is and make no representations or warranties of any kind concerning this ebook, express, implied, statutory or otherwise, including without limitation warranties of title, merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non infringement, or the absence of latent or other defects, accuracy, or the presence or absence of errors, whether or not discoverable, all to the greatest extent permissible under applicable law.





