				 				 			 			This ebook is the product of many hours of hard work by volunteers for Standard Ebooks, and builds on the hard work of other literature lovers made possible by the public domain.

			This particular ebook is based on digital scans available at the Internet Archive and at the HathiTrust Digital Library.

			The writing and artwork within are believed to be in the U.S. public domain, and Standard Ebooks releases this ebook edition under the terms in the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication. For full license information, see the Uncopyright at the end of this ebook.

			Standard Ebooks is a volunteer-driven project that produces ebook editions of public domain literature using modern typography, technology, and editorial standards, and distributes them free of cost. You can download this and other ebooks carefully produced for true book lovers at standardebooks.org.





Imitation of Spenser


			 				Now Morning from her orient chamber came,

				 				And her first footsteps touch’d a verdant hill;

				 				Crowning its lawny crest with amber flame,

				 				Silv’ring the untainted gushes of its rill;

				 				Which, pure from mossy beds, did down distil,

				 				And after parting beds of simple flowers,

				 				By many streams a little lake did fill,

				 				Which round its marge reflected woven bowers,

				 				And, in its middle space, a sky that never lowers.



			 				There the kingfisher saw his plumage bright,

				 				Vying with fish of brilliant dye below;

				 				Whose silken fins, and golden scales’ light

				 				Cast upward, through the waves, a ruby glow:

				 				There saw the swan his neck of arched snow,

				 				And oar’d himself along with majesty;

				 				Sparkled his jetty eyes; his feet did show

				 				Beneath the waves like Afric’s ebony,

				 				And on his back a fay reclined voluptuously.



			 				Ah! could I tell the wonders of an isle

				 				That in that fairest lake had placed been,

				 				I could e’en Dido of her grief beguile;

				 				Or rob from aged Lear his bitter teen:

				 				For sure so fair a place was never seen,

				 				Of all that ever charm’d romantic eye:

				 				It seem’d an emerald in the silver sheen

				 				Of the bright waters; or as when on high,

				 				Through clouds of fleecy white, laughs the cœrulean sky.



			 				And all around it dipp’d luxuriously

				 				Slopings of verdure through the glossy tide,

				 				Which, as it were in gentle amity,

				 				Rippled delighted up the flowery side;

				 				As if to glean the ruddy tears, it tried,

				 				Which fell profusely from the rose-tree stem!

				 				Haply it was the workings of its pride,

				 				In strife to throw upon the shore a gem

				 				Outvying all the buds in Flora’s diadem.





On Death


			 				Can death be sleep, when life is but a dream,

				 				And scenes of bliss pass as a phantom by?

				 				The transient pleasures as a vision seem,

				 				And yet we think the greatest pain’s to die.



			 				How strange it is that man on earth should roam,

				 				And lead a life of woe, but not forsake

				 				His rugged path; nor dare he view alone

				 				His future doom, which is but to awake.





To Byron


			 				Byron! how sweetly sad thy melody!

				 				Attuning still the soul to tenderness,

				 				As if soft Pity, with unusual stress,

				 				Had touch’d her plaintive lute, and thou, being by,

				 				Hadst caught the tones, nor suffer’d them to die.

				 				O’ershadowing sorrow doth not make thee less

				 				Delightful: thou thy griefs dost dress

				 				With a bright halo, shining beamily,

				 				As when a cloud the golden moon doth veil,

				 				Its sides are ting’d with a resplendent glow,

				 				Through the dark robe oft amber rays prevail,

				 				And like fair veins in sable marble flow;

				 				Still warble, dying swan! still tell the tale,

				 				The enchanting tale, the tale of pleasing woe.





To Chatterton


			 				O Chatterton! how very sad thy fate!

				 				Dear child of sorrow⁠—son of misery!

				 				How soon the film of death obscur’d that eye,

				 				Whence Genius mildly flash’d, and high debate.

				 				How soon that voice, majestic and elate,

				 				Melted in dying numbers! Oh! how nigh

				 				Was night to thy fair morning. Thou didst die

				 				A half-blown flow’ret which cold blasts amate.

				 				But this is past: thou art among the stars

				 				Of highest Heaven: to the rolling spheres

				 				Thou sweetly singest: nought thy hymning mars,

				 				Above the ingrate world and human fears.

				 				On earth the good man base detraction bars

				 				From thy fair name, and waters it with tears.





Written on the Day That Mr. Leigh Hunt Left Prison


			 				What though, for showing truth to flatter’d state,

				 				Kind Hunt was shut in prison, yet has he,

				 				In his immortal spirit, been as free

				 				As the sky-searching lark, and as elate.

				 				Minion of grandeur! think you he did wait?

				 				Think you he nought but prison-walls did see,

				 				Till, so unwilling, thou unturn’dst the key?

				 				Ah, no! far happier, nobler was his fate!

				 				In Spenser’s halls he strayed, and bowers fair,

				 				Culling enchanted flowers; and he flew

				 				With daring Milton through the fields of air:

				 				To regions of his own his genius true

				 				Took happy flights. Who shall his fame impair

				 				When thou art dead, and all thy wretched crew?





To Hope


			 				When by my solitary hearth I sit,

				 				And hateful thoughts enwrap my soul in gloom;

				 				When no fair dreams before my “mind’s eye” flit,

				 				And the bare heath of life presents no bloom;

				 				Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed,

				 				And wave thy silver pinions o’er my head.



			 				Whene’er I wander, at the fall of night,

				 				Where woven boughs shut out the moon’s bright ray,

				 				Should sad Despondency my musings fright,

				 				And frown, to drive fair Cheerfulness away,

				 				Peep with the moonbeams through the leafy roof,

				 				And keep that fiend Despondence far aloof.



			 				Should Disappointment, parent of Despair,

				 				Strive for her son to seize my careless heart;

				 				When, like a cloud, he sits upon the air,

				 				Preparing on his spell-bound prey to dart:

				 				Chase him away, sweet Hope, with visage bright,

				 				And fright him as the morning frightens night!



			 				Whene’er the fate of those I hold most dear

				 				Tells to my fearful breast a tale of sorrow,

				 				O bright-eyed Hope, my morbid fancy cheer;

				 				Let me awhile thy sweetest comforts borrow:

				 				Thy heaven-born radiance around me shed,

				 				And wave thy silver pinions o’er my head!



			 				Should e’er unhappy love my bosom pain,

				 				From cruel parents, or relentless fair;

				 				O let me think it is not quite in vain

				 				To sigh out sonnets to the midnight air!

				 				Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed,

				 				And wave thy silver pinions o’er my head.



			 				In the long vista of the years to roll,

				 				Let me not see our country’s honour fade:

				 				O let me see our land retain her soul,

				 				Her pride, her freedom; and not freedom’s shade.

				 				From thy bright eyes unusual brightness shed⁠—

				 				Beneath thy pinions canopy my head!



			 				Let me not see the patriot’s high bequest,

				 				Great Liberty! how great in plain attire!

				 				With the base purple of a court oppress’d,

				 				Bowing her head, and ready to expire:

				 				But let me see thee stoop from heaven on wings

				 				That fill the skies with silver glitterings!



			 				And as, in sparkling majesty, a star

				 				Gilds the bright summit of some gloomy cloud

				 				Brightening the half-veil’d face of heaven afar:

				 				So, when dark thoughts my boding spirit shroud,

				 				Sweet Hope, celestial influence round me shed,

				 				Waving thy silver pinions o’er my head.





Ode to Apollo


			 				In thy western halls of gold

				 				When thou sittest in thy state,

				 				Bards, that erst sublimely told

				 				Heroic deeds, and sang of fate,

				 				With fervour seize their adamantine lyres,

				 				Whose chords are solid rays, and twinkle radiant fires.



			 				Here Homer with his nervous arms

				 				Strikes the twanging harp of war,

				 				And even the western splendor warms,

				 				While the trumpets sound afar:

				 				But, what creates the most intense surprise,

				 				His soul looks out through renovated eyes.



			 				Then, through thy Temple wide, melodious swells

				 				The sweet majestic tone of Maro’s lyre:

				 				The soul delighted on each accent dwells,⁠—

				 				Enraptur’d dwells,⁠—not daring to respire,

				 				The while he tells of grief around a funeral pyre.



			 				’Tis awful silence then again;

				 				Expectant stand the spheres;

				 				Breathless the laurell’d peers,

				 				Nor move, till ends the lofty strain,

				 				Nor move till Milton’s tuneful thunders cease,

				 				And leave once more the ravish’d heavens in peace.



			 				Thou biddest Shakspeare wave his hand,

				 				And quickly forward spring

				 				The Passions⁠—a terrific band⁠—

				 				And each vibrates the string

				 				That with its tyrant temper best accords,

				 				While from their Master’s lips pour forth the inspiring words.



			 				A silver trumpet Spenser blows,

				 				And, as its martial notes to silence flee,

				 				From a virgin chorus flows

				 				A hymn in praise of spotless Chastity.

				 				’Tis still! Wild warblings from the Æolian lyre

				 				Enchantment softly breathe, and tremblingly expire.



			 				Next thy Tasso’s ardent numbers

				 				Float along the pleasèd air,

				 				Calling youth from idle slumbers,

				 				Rousing them from Pleasure’s lair:⁠—

				 				Then o’er the strings his fingers gently move,

				 				And melt the soul to pity and to love.



			 				But when Thou joinest with the Nine,

				 				And all the powers of song combine,

				 				We listen here on earth:

				 				The dying tones that fill the air,

				 				And charm the ear of evening fair,

				 				From thee, Great God of Bards, receive their heavenly birth.





To Some Ladies


			 				What though, while the wonders of nature exploring,

				 				I cannot your light, mazy footsteps attend;

				 				Nor listen to accents, that almost adoring,

				 				Bless Cynthia’s face, the enthusiast’s friend:



			 				Yet over the steep, whence the mountain-stream rushes,

				 				With you, kindest friends, in idea I rove;

				 				Mark the clear tumbling crystal, its passionate gushes,

				 				Its spray that the wild flower kindly bedews.



			 				Why linger you so, the wild labyrinth strolling?

				 				Why breathless, unable your bliss to declare?

				 				Ah! you list to the nightingale’s tender condoling,

				 				Responsive to sylphs, in the moon-beamy air.



			 				’Tis morn, and the flowers with dew are yet drooping,

				 				I see you are treading the verge of the sea:

				 				And now! ah, I see it⁠—you just now are stooping

				 				To pick up the keepsake intended for me.



			 				If a cherub, on pinions of silver descending,

				 				Had brought me a gem from the fretwork of heaven;

				 				And smiles, with his star-cheering voice sweetly blending,

				 				The blessings of Tighe had melodiously given;



			 				It had not created a warmer emotion

				 				Than the present, fair nymphs, I was blest with from you;

				 				Than the shell, from the bright golden sands of the ocean,

				 				Which the emerald waves at your feet gladly threw.



			 				For, indeed, ’tis a sweet and peculiar pleasure,

				 				(And blissful is he who such happiness finds,)

				 				To possess but a span of the hour of leisure,

				 				In elegant, pure, and aerial minds.





On Receiving a Curious Shell and a Copy of Verses from the Same Ladies


			 				Hast thou from the caves of Golconda, a gem

				 				Pure as the ice-drop that froze on the mountain?

				 				Bright as the humming-bird’s green diadem,

				 				When it flutters in sunbeams that shine through a fountain?



			 				Hast thou a goblet for dark sparkling wine?

				 				That goblet right heavy, and massy, and gold?

				 				And splendidly mark’d with the story divine

				 				Of Armida the fair, and Rinaldo the bold?



			 				Hast thou a steed with a mane richly flowing?

				 				Hast thou a sword that thine enemy’s smart is?

				 				Hast thou a trumpet rich melodies blowing?

				 				And wear’st thou the shield of the fam’d Britomartis?



			 				What is it that hangs from thy shoulder, so brave,

				 				Embroidered with many a spring peering flower?

				 				Is it a scarf that thy fair lady gave?

				 				And hastest thou now to that fair lady’s bower?



			 				Ah! courteous Sir Knight, with large joy thou art crown’d;

				 				Full many the glories that brighten thy youth!

				 				I will tell thee my blisses, which richly abound

				 				In magical powers to bless, and to soothe.



			 				On this scroll thou seest written in characters fair

				 				A sun-beamy tale of a wreath, and a chain:

				 				And, warrior, it nurtures the property rare

				 				Of charming my mind from the trammels of pain.



			 				This canopy mark: ’tis the work of a fay;

				 				Beneath its rich shade did King Oberon languish,

				 				When lovely Titania was far, far away,

				 				And cruelly left him to sorrow, and anguish.



			 				There, oft would he bring from his soft-sighing lute

				 				Wild strains to which, spell-bound, the nightingales listen’d;

				 				The wondering spirits of heaven were mute,

				 				And tears ’mong the dewdrops of morning oft glistened.



			 				In this little dome, all those melodies strange,

				 				Soft, plaintive, and melting, for ever will sigh;

				 				Nor e’er will the notes from their tenderness change;

				 				Nor e’er will the music of Oberon die.



			 				So, when I am in a voluptuous vein,

				 				I pillow my head on the sweets of the rose,

				 				And list to the tale of the wreath, and the chain,

				 				Till its echoes depart; then I sink to repose.



			 				Adieu, valiant Eric! with joy thou art crown’d;

				 				Full many the glories that brighten thy youth,

				 				I too have my blisses, which richly abound

				 				In magical powers, to bless and to soothe.





Stanzas to Miss Wylie


			 				O come, Georgiana! the rose is full blown,

				 				The riches of Flora are lavishly strown,

				 				The air is all softness, and crystal the streams;

				 				The West is resplendently clothed in beams.



			 				O come! let us haste to the freshening shades,

				 				The quaintly carv’d seats, and the opening glades;

				 				Where the faeries are chanting their evening hymns,

				 				And the last sun-beam the sylph lightly swims.



			 				And when thou art weary, I’ll find thee a bed

				 				Of mosses and flowers to pillow thy head:

				 				And there Georgiana I’ll sit at thy feet,

				 				While my story of love I enraptur’d repeat.



			 				So fondly I’ll breathe, and so softly I’ll sigh,

				 				Thou wilt think that some amorous zephyr is nigh;

				 				Yet no⁠—as I breathe I will press thy fair knee,

				 				And then thou wilt know that the sigh comes from me.



			 				Ah! why, dearest girl, should we lose all these blisses?

				 				That mortal’s a fool who such happiness misses:

				 				So smile acquiescence, and give me thy hand,

				 				With love-looking eyes, and with voice sweetly bland.





“Woman! When I Behold Thee Flippant, Vain”


			 				Woman! when I behold thee flippant, vain,

				 				Inconstant, childish, proud, and full of fancies;

				 				Without that modest softening that enhances

				 				The downcast eye, repentant of the pain

				 				That its mild light creates to heal again:

				 				E’en then, elate, my spirit leaps, and prances,

				 				E’en then my soul with exultation dances

				 				For that to love, so long, I’ve dormant lain:

				 				But when I see thee meek, and kind, and tender,

				 				Heavens! how desperately do I adore

				 				Thy winning graces;⁠—to be thy defender

				 				I hotly burn⁠—to be a Calidore⁠—

				 				A very Red Cross Knight⁠—a stout Leander⁠—

				 				Might I be lov’d by thee like these of yore.



			 				Light feet, dark violet eyes, and parted hair;

				 				Soft dimpled hands, white neck, and creamy breast,

				 				Are things on which the dazzled senses rest

				 				Till the fond, fixèd eyes forget they stare.

				 				From such fine pictures, Heavens! I cannot dare

				 				To turn my admiration, though unpossess’d

				 				They be of what is worthy,⁠—though not drest

				 				In lovely modesty, and virtues rare.

				 				Yet these I leave as thoughtless as a lark;

				 				These lures I straight forget,⁠—e’en ere I dine,

				 				Or thrice my palate moisten: but when I mark

				 				Such charms with mild intelligences shine,

				 				My ear is open like a greedy shark,

				 				To catch the tunings of a voice divine.



			 				Ah! who can e’er forget so fair a being?

				 				Who can forget her half-retiring sweets?

				 				God! she is like a milk-white lamb that bleats

				 				For man’s protection. Surely the All-seeing,

				 				Who joys to see us with his gifts agreeing,

				 				Will never give him pinions, who intreats

				 				Such innocence to ruin,⁠—who vilely cheats

				 				A dove-like bosom. In truth there is no freeing

				 				One’s thoughts from such a beauty; when I hear

				 				A lay that once I saw her hand awake,

				 				Her form seems floating palpable, and near:

				 				Had I e’er seen her from an arbour take

				 				A dewy flower, oft would that hand appear,

				 				And o’er my eyes the trembling moisture shake.





To ⸻


			 				Had I a man’s fair form, then might my sighs

				 				Be echoed swiftly through that ivory shell

				 				Thine ear, and find thy gentle heart; so well

				 				Would passion arm me for the enterprise:

				 				But ah! I am no knight whose foeman dies;

				 				No cuirass glistens on my bosom’s swell;

				 				I am no happy shepherd of the dell

				 				Whose lips have trembled with a maiden’s eyes.

				 				Yet must I dote upon thee,⁠—call thee sweet,

				 				Sweeter by far than Hybla’s honied roses

				 				When steep’d in dew rich to intoxication.

				 				Ah! I will taste that dew, for me ’tis meet,

				 				And when the moon her pallid face discloses,

				 				I’ll gather some by spells, and incantation.





Sonnet


			 				Happy is England! I could be content

				 				To see no other verdure than its own;

				 				To feel no other breezes than are blown

				 				Through its tall woods with high romances blent:

				 				Yet do I sometimes feel a languishment

				 				For skies Italian, and an inward groan

				 				To sit upon an Alp as on a throne,

				 				And half forget what world or worldling meant.

				 				Happy is England, sweet her artless daughters;

				 				Enough their simple loveliness for me,

				 				Enough their whitest arms in silence clinging:

				 				Yet do I often warmly burn to see

				 				Beauties of deeper glance, and hear their singing,

				 				And float with them about the summer waters.





Sonnet


			 				How many bards gild the lapses of time!

				 				A few of them have ever been the food

				 				Of my delighted fancy,⁠—I could brood

				 				Over their beauties, earthly, or sublime:

				 				And often, when I sit me down to rhyme,

				 				These will in throngs before my mind intrude:

				 				But no confusion, no disturbance rude

				 				Do they occasion; ’tis a pleasing chime.

				 				So the unnumber’d sounds that evening store;

				 				The songs of birds⁠—the whisp’ring of the leaves⁠—

				 				The voice of waters⁠—the great bell that heaves

				 				With solemn sound,⁠—and thousand others more,

				 				That distance of recognizance bereaves,

				 				Make pleasing music, and not wild uproar.





On First Looking Into Chapman’s Homer


			 				Much have I travell’d in the realms of gold,

				 				And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;

				 				Round many western islands have I been

				 				Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.

				 				Oft of one wide expanse had I been told

				 				That deep-brow’d Homer ruled as his demesne:

				 				Yet did I never breathe its pure serene

				 				Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:

				 				Then felt I like some watcher of the skies

				 				When a new planet swims into his ken;

				 				Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes

				 				He star’d at the Pacific⁠—and all his men

				 				Look’d at each other with a wild surmise⁠—

				 				Silent, upon a peak in Darien.





Epistle to George Felton Mathew


			 				Sweet are the pleasures that to verse belong,

				 				And doubly sweet a brotherhood in song;

				 				Nor can remembrance, Mathew! bring to view

				 				A fate more pleasing, a delight more true

				 				Than that in which the brother Poets joy’d,

				 				Who, with combinèd powers, their wit employ’d

				 				To raise a trophy to the drama’s muses.

				 				The thought of this great partnership diffuses

				 				Over the genius-loving heart, a feeling

				 				Of all that’s high, and great, and good, and healing.



			 				Too partial friend! fain would I follow thee

				 				Past each horizon of fine poesy;

				 				Fain would I echo back each pleasant note

				 				As o’er Sicilian seas, clear anthems float

				 				’Mong the light skimming gondolas far parted,

				 				Just when the sun his farewell beam has darted:

				 				But ’tis impossible; far different cares

				 				Beckon me sternly from soft “Lydian airs,”

				 				And hold my faculties so long in thrall,

				 				That I am oft in doubt whether at all

				 				I shall again see Phœbus in the morning:

				 				Or flush’d Aurora in the roseate dawning!

				 				Or a white Naiad in a rippling stream;

				 				Or a rapt seraph in a moonlight beam;

				 				Or again witness what with thee I’ve seen,

				 				The dew by fairy feet swept from the green,

				 				After a night of some quaint jubilee

				 				Which every elf and fay had come to see:

				 				When bright processions took their airy march

				 				Beneath the curvèd moon’s triumphal arch.



			 				But might I now each passing moment give

				 				To the coy Muse, with me she would not live

				 				In this dark city, nor would condescend

				 				’Mid contradictions her delights to lend.

				 				Should e’er the fine-eyed maid to me be kind,

				 				Ah! surely it must be whene’er I find

				 				Some flowery spot, sequester’d, wild, romantic,

				 				That often must have seen a poet frantic;

				 				Where oaks, that erst the Druid knew, are growing,

				 				And flowers, the glory of one day, are blowing;

				 				Where the dark-leav’d laburnum’s drooping clusters

				 				Reflect athwart the stream their yellow lustres,

				 				And intertwined the cassia’s arms unite,

				 				With its own drooping buds, but very white.

				 				Where on one side are covert branches hung,

				 				’Mong which the nightingales have always sung

				 				In leafy quiet: where to pry, aloof

				 				Atween the pillars of the sylvan roof,

				 				Would be to find where violet beds were nestling,

				 				And where the bee with cowslip bells was wrestling.

				 				There must be too a ruin dark and gloomy,

				 				To say “Joy not too much in all that’s bloomy.”



			 				Yet this is vain⁠—O Mathew, lend thy aid

				 				To find a place where I may greet the maid⁠—

				 				Where we may soft humanity put on,

				 				And sit, and rhyme and think on Chatterton;

				 				And that warm-hearted Shakspeare sent to meet him

				 				Four laurell’d spirits, heavenward to entreat him.

				 				With reverence would we speak of all the sages

				 				Who have left streaks of light athwart their ages:

				 				And thou shouldst moralize on Milton’s blindness,

				 				And mourn the fearful dearth of human kindness

				 				To those who strove with the bright golden wing

				 				Of genius, to flap away each sting

				 				Thrown by the pitiless world. We next could tell

				 				Of those who in the cause of freedom fell;

				 				Of our own Alfred, of Helvetian Tell;

				 				Of him whose name to ev’ry heart’s a solace,

				 				High-minded and unbending William Wallace.

				 				While to the rugged north our musing turns,

				 				We well might drop a tear for him, and Burns.



			 				Felton! without incitements such as these.

				 				How vain for me the niggard Muse to tease:

				 				For thee, she will thy every dwelling grace,

				 				And make “a sunshine in a shady place:”

				 				For thou wast once a flow’ret blooming wild,

				 				Close to the source, bright, pure, and undefil’d,

				 				Whence gush the streams of song: in happy hour

				 				Came chaste Diana from her shady bower,

				 				Just as the sun was from the east uprising;

				 				And, as for him some gift she was devising,

				 				Beheld thee, pluck’d thee, cast thee in the stream

				 				To meet her glorious brother’s greeting beam.

				 				I marvel much that thou hast never told

				 				How, from a flower, into a fish of gold

				 				Apollo chang’d thee: how thou next didst seem

				 				A black-ey’d swan upon the widening stream;

				 				And when thou first didst in that mirror trace

				 				The placid features of a human face:

				 				That thou hast never told thy travels strange,

				 				And all the wonders of the mazy range

				 				O’er pebbly crystal, and o’er golden sands;

				 				Kissing thy daily food from Naiads’ pearly hands.





Specimen of an Induction to a Poem


			 				Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;

				 				For large white plumes are dancing in mine eye.

				 				Not like the formal crest of latter days:

				 				But bending in a thousand graceful ways;

				 				So graceful, that it seems no mortal hand,

				 				Or e’en the touch of Archimago’s wand,

				 				Could charm them into such an attitude.

				 				We must think rather, that in playful mood,

				 				Some mountain breeze had turned its chief delight,

				 				To show this wonder of its gentle might.

				 				Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;

				 				For while I muse, the lance points slantingly

				 				Athwart the morning air; some lady sweet,

				 				Who cannot feel for cold her tender feet,

				 				From the worn top of some old battlement

				 				Hails it with tears, her stout defender sent:

				 				And from her own pure self no joy dissembling,

				 				Wraps round her ample robe with happy trembling.

				 				Sometimes, when the good Knight his rest would take,

				 				It is reflected, clearly, in a lake,

				 				With the young ashen boughs, ’gainst which it rests,

				 				And th’ half-seen mossiness of linnets’ nests.

				 				Ah! shall I ever tell its cruelty,

				 				When the fire flashes from a warrior’s eye,

				 				And his tremendous hand is grasping it,

				 				And his dark brow for very wrath is knit?

				 				Or when his spirit, with more calm intent,

				 				Leaps to the honours of a tournament,

				 				And makes the gazers round about the ring

				 				Stare at the grandeur of the balancing?

				 				No, no! this is far off:⁠—then how shall I

				 				Revive the dying tones of minstrelsy,

				 				Which linger yet about long gothic arches,

				 				In dark green ivy, and among wild larches?

				 				How sing the splendour of the revelries,

				 				When butts of wine are drunk off to the lees?

				 				And that bright lance, against the fretted wall,

				 				Beneath the shade of stately banneral,

				 				Is slung with shining cuirass, sword, and shield?

				 				Where ye may see a spur in bloody field.

				 				Light-footed damsels move with gentle paces

				 				Round the wide hall, and show their happy faces;

				 				Or stand in courtly talk by fives and sevens:

				 				Like those fair stars that twinkle in the heavens.

				 				Yet must I tell a tale of chivalry:

				 				Or wherefore comes that knight so proudly by?

				 				Wherefore more proudly does the gentle knight

				 				Rein in the swelling of his ample might?

				 				Spenser! thy brows are archèd, open, kind,

				 				And come like a clear sunrise to my mind;

				 				And always does my heart with pleasure dance,

				 				When I think on thy noble countenance;

				 				Where never yet was ought more earthly seen

				 				Than the pure freshness of thy laurels green.

				 				Therefore, great bard, I not so fearfully

				 				Call on thy gentle spirit to hover nigh

				 				My daring steps: or if thy tender care,

				 				Thus startled unaware,

				 				Be jealous that the foot of other wight

				 				Should madly follow that bright path of light

				 				Trac’d by thy lov’d Libertas; he will speak,

				 				And tell thee that my prayer is very meek;

				 				That I will follow with due reverence,

				 				And start with awe at mine own strange pretence.

				 				Him thou wilt hear; so I will rest in hope

				 				To see wide plains, fair trees, and lawny slope:

				 				The morn, the eve, the light, the shade, the flowers;

				 				Clear streams, smooth lakes, and overlooking towers.





				Calidore 				A Fragment




			 				Young Calidore is paddling o’er the lake;

				 				His healthful spirit eager and awake

				 				To feel the beauty of a silent eve,

				 				Which seem’d full loth this happy world to leave;

				 				The light dwelt o’er the scene so lingeringly.

				 				He bares his forehead to the cool blue sky,

				 				And smiles at the far clearness all around,

				 				Until his heart is well nigh over wound

				 				And turns for calmness to the pleasant green

				 				Of easy slopes, and shadowy trees that lean

				 				So elegantly o’er the waters’ brim

				 				And show their blossoms trim.

				 				Scarce can his clear and nimble eyesight follow

				 				The freaks and dartings of the black-wing’d swallow,

				 				Delighting much, to see it half at rest,

				 				Dip so refreshingly its wings, and breast

				 				’Gainst the smooth surface, and to mark anon,

				 				The widening circles into nothing gone.



			 				And now the sharp keel of his little boat

				 				Comes up with ripple, and with easy float,

				 				And glides into a bed of water-lilies:

				 				Broad-leav’d are they, and their white canopies

				 				Are upward turn’d to catch the heavens’ dew.

				 				Near to a little island’s point they grew;

				 				Whence Calidore might have the goodliest view

				 				Of this sweet spot of earth. The bowery shore

				 				Went off in gentle windings to the hoar

				 				And light blue mountains: but no breathing man

				 				With a warm heart, and eye prepared to scan

				 				Nature’s clear beauty, could pass lightly by

				 				Objects that look’d out so invitingly

				 				On either side. These, gentle Calidore

				 				Greeted, as he had known them long before.



			 				The sidelong view of swelling leafiness,

				 				Which the glad setting sun in gold doth dress;

				 				Whence, ever and anon, the jay outsprings,

				 				And scales upon the beauty of its wings.



			 				The lonely turret, shatter’d, and outworn,

				 				Stands venerably proud; too proud to mourn

				 				Its long lost grandeur: fir-trees grow around,

				 				Aye dropping their hard fruit upon the ground.



			 				The little chapel, with the cross above,

				 				Upholding wreaths of ivy; the white dove,

				 				That on the windows spreads his feathers light,

				 				And seems from purple clouds to wing its flight.



			 				Green tufted islands casting their soft shades

				 				Across the lake; sequester’d leafy glades,

				 				That through the dimness of their twilight show

				 				Large dock-leaves, spiral foxgloves, or the glow

				 				Of the cat’s wild eyes, or the silvery stems

				 				Of delicate birch-trees, or long grass which hems

				 				A little brook. The youth had long been viewing

				 				These pleasant things, and heaven was bedewing

				 				The mountain flowers, when his glad senses caught

				 				A trumpet’s silver voice. Ah! it was fraught

				 				With many joys for him: the warder’s ken

				 				Had found white coursers prancing in the glen:

				 				Friends very dear to him he soon will see;

				 				So pushes off his boat most eagerly,

				 				And soon upon the lake he skims along,

				 				Deaf to the nightingale’s first under-song;

				 				Nor minds he the white swans that dream so sweetly:

				 				His spirit flies before him so completely.



			 				And now he turns a jutting point of land,

				 				Whence may be seen the castle gloomy, and grand:

				 				Nor will a bee buzz round two swelling peaches,

				 				Before the point of his light shallop reaches

				 				Those marble steps that through the water dip:

				 				Now over them he goes with hasty trip,

				 				And scarcely stays to ope the folding doors:

				 				Anon he leaps along the oaken floors

				 				Of halls and corridors.



			 				Delicious sounds! those little bright-eyed things

				 				That float about the air on azure wings,

				 				Had been less heartfelt by him than the clang

				 				Of clattering hoofs; into the court he sprang,

				 				Just as two noble steeds, and palfreys twain,

				 				Were slanting out their necks with loosen’d rein;

				 				While from beneath the threat’ning portcullis

				 				They brought their happy burthens. What a kiss,

				 				What gentle squeeze he gave each lady’s hand!

				 				How tremblingly their delicate ankles spann’d!

				 				Into how sweet a trance his soul was gone,

				 				While whisperings of affection

				 				Made him delay to let their tender feet

				 				Come to the earth; with an incline so sweet

				 				From their low palfreys o’er his neck they bent:

				 				And whether there were tears of languishment,

				 				Or that the evening dew had pearl’d their tresses,

				 				He feels a moisture on his cheek, and blesses

				 				With lips that tremble, and with glistening eye,

				 				All the soft luxury

				 				That nestled in his arms. A dimpled hand,

				 				Fair as some wonder out of fairy land,

				 				Hung from his shoulder like the drooping flowers

				 				Of whitest Cassia, fresh from summer showers:

				 				And this he fondled with his happy cheek,

				 				As if for joy he would no further seek;

				 				When the kind voice of good Sir Clerimond

				 				Came to his ear, like something from beyond

				 				His present being: so he gently drew

				 				His warm arms, thrilling now with pulses new,

				 				From their sweet thrall, and forward gently bending,

				 				Thank’d Heaven that his joy was never ending;

				 				While ’gainst his forehead he devoutly press’d

				 				A hand Heaven made to succour the distress’d;

				 				A hand that from the world’s bleak promontory

				 				Had lifted Calidore for deeds of glory.



			 				Amid the pages, and the torches’ glare,

				 				There stood a knight, patting the flowing hair

				 				Of his proud horse’s mane: he was withal

				 				A man of elegance, and stature tall:

				 				So that the waving of his plumes would be

				 				High as the berries of a wild ash-tree,

				 				Or as the wingèd cap of Mercury.

				 				His armour was so dexterously wrought

				 				In shape, that sure no living man had thought

				 				It hard, and heavy steel: but that indeed

				 				It was some glorious form, some splendid weed,

				 				In which a spirit new come from the skies

				 				Might live, and show itself to human eyes.

				 				’Tis the far-fam’d, the brave Sir Gondibert,

				 				Said the good man to Calidore alert;

				 				While the young warrior with a step of grace

				 				Came up,⁠—a courtly smile upon his face,

				 				And mailèd hand held out, ready to greet

				 				The large-eyed wonder, and ambitious heat

				 				Of the aspiring boy; who as he led

				 				Those smiling ladies, often turned his head

				 				To admire the visor arched so gracefully

				 				Over a knightly brow; while they went by

				 				The lamps that from the high-roof’d hall were pendent,

				 				And gave the steel a shining quite transcendent.



			 				Soon in a pleasant chamber they are seated;

				 				The sweet-lipp’d ladies have already greeted

				 				All the green leaves that round the window clamber,

				 				To show their purple stars, and bells of amber.

				 				Sir Gondibert has doff’d his shining steel,

				 				Gladdening in the free, and airy feel

				 				Of a light mantle; and while Clerimond

				 				Is looking round about him with a fond

				 				And placid eye, young Calidore is burning

				 				To hear of knightly deeds, and gallant spurning

				 				Of all unworthiness; and how the strong of arm

				 				Kept off dismay, and terror, and alarm

				 				From lovely woman; while brimful of this,

				 				He gave each damsel’s hand so warm a kiss,

				 				And had such manly ardour in his eye,

				 				That each at other look’d half-staringly;

				 				And then their features started into smiles,

				 				Sweet as blue heavens o’er enchanted isles.



			 				Softly the breezes from the forest came,

				 				Softly they blew aside the taper’s flame;

				 				Clear was the song from Philomel’s far bower;

				 				Grateful the incense from the lime-tree flower;

				 				Mysterious, wild, the far heard trumpet’s tone;

				 				Lovely the moon in ether, all alone:

				 				Sweet too the converse of these happy mortals,

				 				As that of busy spirits when the portals

				 				Are closing in the west; or that soft humming

				 				We hear around when Hesperus is coming.

				 				Sweet be their sleep. …





To ⸻


			 				Hadst thou liv’d in days of old,

				 				O what wonders had been told

				 				Of thy lively countenance,

				 				And thy humid eyes that dance

				 				In the midst of their own brightness;

				 				In the very fane of lightness.

				 				Over which thine eyebrows, leaning,

				 				Picture out each lovely meaning:

				 				In a dainty bend they lie,

				 				Like to streaks across the sky,

				 				Or the feathers from a crow,

				 				Fallen on a bed of snow.

				 				Of thy dark hair, that extends

				 				Into many graceful bends:

				 				As the leaves of Hellebore

				 				Turn to whence they sprung before.

				 				And behind each ample curl

				 				Peeps the richness of a pearl.



			 				Downward too flows many a tress

				 				With a glossy waviness;

				 				Full, and round like globes that rise

				 				From the censer to the skies

				 				Through sunny air. Add, too, the sweetness

				 				Of thy honied voice; the neatness

				 				Of thine ankle lightly turn’d:

				 				With those beauties scarce discern’d,

				 				Kept with such sweet privacy,

				 				That they seldom meet the eye

				 				Of the little loves that fly

				 				Round about with eager pry.

				 				Saving when, with freshening lave,

				 				Thou dipp’st them in the taintless wave;

				 				Like twin water-lilies, born

				 				In the coolness of the morn.

				 				O, if thou hadst breathèd then,

				 				Now the Muses had been ten.

				 				Couldst thou wish for lineage higher

				 				Than twin-sister of Thalia?

				 				At least for ever, evermore

				 				Will I call the Graces four.



			 				Hadst thou liv’d when chivalry

				 				Lifted up her lance on high,

				 				Tell me what thou wouldst have been?

				 				Ah! I see the silver sheen

				 				Of thy broider’d, floating vest

				 				Cov’ring half thine ivory breast:

				 				Which, O heavens! I should see,

				 				But that cruel destiny

				 				Has plac’d a golden cuirass there;

				 				Keeping secret what is fair.

				 				Like sunbeams in a cloudlet nested

				 				Thy locks in knightly casque are rested:

				 				O’er which bend four milky plumes

				 				Like the gentle lily’s blooms

				 				Springing from a costly vase.

				 				See with what a stately pace

				 				Comes thine alabaster steed;

				 				Servant of heroic deed!

				 				O’er his loins his trappings glow

				 				Like the northern lights on snow.

				 				Mount his back! thy sword unsheath!

				 				Sign of the enchanter’s death;

				 				Bane of every wicked spell;

				 				Silencer of dragon’s yell.

				 				Alas! thou this wilt never do:

				 				Thou art an enchantress too,

				 				And wilt surely never spill

				 				Blood of those whose eyes can kill.





To G. A. W.


			 				Nymph of the downward smile and sidelong glance,

				 				In what diviner moments of the day

				 				Art thou most lovely? When gone far astray

				 				Into the labyrinths of sweet utterance?

				 				Or when serenely wand’ring in a trance

				 				Of sober thought? Or when starting away,

				 				With careless robe, to meet the morning ray,

				 				Thou spar’st the flowers in thy mazy dance?

				 				Haply ’tis when thy ruby lips part sweetly,

				 				And so remain, because thou listenest:

				 				But thou to please wert nurtured so completely

				 				That I can never tell what mood is best.

				 				I shall as soon pronounce which Grace more neatly

				 				Trips it before Apollo than the rest.





Sonnet


			 				As from the darkening gloom a silver dove

				 				Upsoars, and darts into the eastern light,

				 				On pinions that nought moves but pure delight,

				 				So fled thy soul into the realms above,

				 				Regions of peace and everlasting love;

				 				Where happy spirits, crown’d with circlets bright

				 				Of starry beam, and gloriously bedight,

				 				Taste the high joy none but the blest can prove.

				 				There thou or joinest the immortal quire

				 				In melodies that even heaven fair

				 				Fill with superior bliss, or, at desire,

				 				Of the omnipotent Father, cleav’st the air

				 				On holy message sent⁠—What pleasure’s higher?

				 				Wherefore does any grief our joy impair?





On a Picture of Leander


			 				Come hither, all sweet maidens soberly,

				 				Down-looking aye, and with a chasten’d light

				 				Hid in the fringes of your eyelids white,

				 				And meekly let your fair hands joined be,

				 				As if so gentle that ye could not see,

				 				Untouch’d, a victim of your beauty bright,

				 				Sinking away to his young spirit’s night,

				 				Sinking bewilder’d ’mid the dreary sea:

				 				’Tis young Leander toiling to his death;

				 				Nigh swooning, he doth purse his weary lips

				 				For Hero’s cheek, and smiles against her smile.

				 				O horrid dream! see how his body dips

				 				Dead-heavy; arms and shoulders gleam awhile:

				 				He’s gone; up bubbles all his amorous breath!





Sonnet


			 				Oh! how I love, on a fair summer’s eve,

				 				When streams of light pour down the golden west,

				 				And on the balmy zephyrs tranquil rest

				 				The silver clouds, far⁠—far away to leave

				 				All meaner thoughts, and take a sweet reprieve

				 				From little cares; to find, with easy quest,

				 				A fragrant wild, with Nature’s beauty drest,

				 				And there into delight my soul deceive,

				 				There warm my breast with patriotic lore,

				 				Musing on Milton’s fate⁠—on Sydney’s bier⁠—

				 				Till their stern forms before my mind arise:

				 				Perhaps on wings of Poesy upsoar,

				 				Full often dropping a delicious tear,

				 				When some melodious sorrow spells mine eyes.





Sonnet to Solitude


			 				O Solitude! if I must with thee dwell,

				 				Let it not be among the jumbled heap

				 				Of murky buildings; climb with me the steep,⁠—

				 				Nature’s observatory,⁠—whence the dell,

				 				Its flowery slopes, its river’s crystal swell,

				 				May seem a span; let me thy vigils keep

				 				’Mongst boughs pavilion’d, where the deer’s swift leap

				 				Startles the wild bee from the foxglove bell.

				 				But though I’ll gladly trace these scenes with thee,

				 				Yet the sweet converse of an innocent mind,

				 				Whose words are images of thoughts refin’d,

				 				Is my soul’s pleasure; and it sure must be

				 				Almost the highest bliss of human-kind,

				 				When to thy haunts two kindred spirits flee.





Sonnet


			 				To one who has been long in city pent,

				 				’Tis very sweet to look into the fair

				 				And open face of heaven,⁠—to breathe a prayer

				 				Full in the smile of the blue firmament.

				 				Who is more happy, when, with hearts content,

				 				Fatigued he sinks into some pleasant lair

				 				Of wavy grass, and reads a debonair

				 				And gentle tale of love and languishment?

				 				Returning home at evening, with an ear

				 				Catching the notes of Philomel,⁠—an eye

				 				Watching the sailing cloudlet’s bright career,

				 				He mourns that day so soon has glided by:

				 				E’en like the passage of an angel’s tear

				 				That falls through the clear ether silently.





To a Young Lady Who Sent Me a Laurel Crown


			 				Fresh morning gusts have blown away all fear

				 				From my glad bosom,⁠—now from gloominess

				 				I mount for ever⁠—not an atom less

				 				Than the proud laurel shall content my bier.

				 				No! by the eternal stars! or why sit here

				 				In the Sun’s eye, and ’gainst my temples press

				 				Apollo’s very leaves, woven to bless

				 				By thy white fingers and thy spirit clear.

				 				Lo! who dares say, “Do this?” Who dares call down

				 				My will from its high purpose? Who say, “Stand,”

				 				Or “Go?” This mighty moment I would frown

				 				On abject Caesars⁠—not the stoutest band

				 				Of mailèd heroes should tear off my crown:

				 				Yet would I kneel and kiss thy gentle hand!





To a Friend Who Sent Me Some Roses


			 				As late I rambled in the happy fields,

				 				What time the skylark shakes the tremulous dew

				 				From his lush clover covert; when anew

				 				Adventurous knights take up their dinted shields:

				 				I saw the sweetest flower wild nature yields,

				 				A fresh-blown musk-rose; ’twas the first that threw

				 				Its sweets upon the summer: graceful it grew

				 				As is the wand that Queen Titania wields.

				 				And, as I feasted on its fragrancy,

				 				I thought the garden-rose it far excell’d:

				 				But when, O Wells! thy roses came to me,

				 				My sense with their deliciousness was spell’d:

				 				Soft voices had they, that with tender plea

				 				Whisper’d of peace, and truth, and friendliness unquell’d.





To My Brother George


			 				Many the wonders I this day have seen:

				 				The sun, when first he kist away the tears

				 				That fill’d the eyes of morn;⁠—the laurell’d peers

				 				Who from the feathery gold of evening lean;⁠—

				 				The ocean with its vastness, its blue green,

				 				Its ships, its rocks, its caves, its hopes, its fears,⁠—

				 				Its voice mysterious, which whoso hears

				 				Must think on what will be, and what has been.

				 				E’en now, dear George, while this for you I write,

				 				Cynthia is from her silken curtains peeping

				 				So scantly, that it seems her bridal night,

				 				And she her half-discover’d revels keeping.

				 				But what, without the social thought of thee,

				 				Would be the wonders of the sky and sea?





Epistle to My Brother George


			 				Full many a dreary hour have I past,

				 				My brain bewilder’d, and my mind o’ercast

				 				With heaviness; in seasons when I’ve thought

				 				No spherey strains by me could e’er be caught

				 				From the blue dome, though I to dimness gaze

				 				On the far depth where sheeted lightning plays;

				 				Or, on the wavy grass outstretch’d supinely,

				 				Pry ’mong the stars, to strive to think divinely:

				 				That I should never hear Apollo’s song,

				 				Though feathery clouds were floating all along

				 				The purple west, and, two bright streaks between,

				 				The golden lyre itself were dimly seen:

				 				That the still murmur of the honey bee

				 				Would never teach a rural song to me:

				 				That the bright glance from beauty’s eyelids slanting

				 				Would never make a lay of mine enchanting,

				 				Or warm my breast with ardour to unfold

				 				Some tale of love and arms in time of old.



			 				But there are times, when those that love the bay,

				 				Fly from all sorrowing far, far away;

				 				A sudden glow comes on them, nought they see

				 				In water, earth, or air, but poesy.

				 				It has been said, dear George, and true I hold it,

				 				(For knightly Spenser to Libertas told it,)

				 				That when a Poet is in such a trance,

				 				In air he sees white coursers paw and prance,

				 				Bestridden of gay knights, in gay apparel,

				 				Who at each other tilt in playful quarrel;

				 				And what we, ignorantly, sheet-lightning call,

				 				Is the swift opening of their wide portal,

				 				When the bright warder blows his trumpet clear,

				 				Whose tones reach nought on earth but Poet’s ear.

				 				When these enchanted portals open wide,

				 				And through the light the horsemen swiftly glide,

				 				The Poet’s eye can reach those golden halls,

				 				And view the glory of their festivals:

				 				Their ladies fair, that in the distance seem

				 				Fit for the silv’ring of a seraph’s dream;

				 				Their rich brimm’d goblets, that incessant run

				 				Like the bright spots that move about the sun;

				 				And, when upheld, the wine from each bright jar

				 				Pours with the lustre of a falling star.

				 				Yet further off are dimly seen their bowers,

				 				Of which no mortal eye can reach the flowers;

				 				And ’tis right just, for well Apollo knows

				 				’Twould make the Poet quarrel with the rose.

				 				All that’s reveal’d from that far seat of blisses,

				 				Is, the clear fountains’ interchanging kisses,

				 				As gracefully descending, light and thin,

				 				Like silver streaks across a dolphin’s fin,

				 				When he upswimmeth from the coral caves,

				 				And sports with half his tail above the waves.



			 				These wonders strange he sees, and many more,

				 				Whose head is pregnant with poetic lore.

				 				Should he upon an evening ramble fare

				 				With forehead to the soothing breezes bare,

				 				Would he nought see but the dark, silent blue,

				 				With all its diamonds trembling through and through?

				 				Or the coy moon, when in the waviness

				 				Of whitest clouds she does her beauty dress,

				 				And staidly paces higher up, and higher,

				 				Like a sweet nun in holiday attire?

				 				Ah, yes! much more would start into his sight⁠—

				 				The revelries, and mysteries of night:

				 				And should I ever see them, I will tell you

				 				Such tales as needs must with amazement spell you.



			 				These are the living pleasures of the bard:

				 				But richer far posterity’s award.

				 				What does he murmur with his latest breath,

				 				While his proud eye looks through the film of death?

				 				“What though I leave this dull and earthly mould

				 				Yet shall my spirit lofty converse hold

				 				With after times.⁠—The patriot shall feel

				 				My stern alarum, and unsheath his steel;

				 				Or in the senate thunder out my number

				 				To startle princes from their easy slumber.

				 				The sage will mingle with each moral theme,

				 				My happy thoughts sententious; he will teem

				 				With lofty periods when my verses fire him,

				 				And then I’ll stoop from heaven to inspire him.

				 				Lays have I left of such a dear delight

				 				That maids will sing them on their bridal night.

				 				Gay villagers, upon a morn of May,

				 				When they have tired their gentle limbs with play,

				 				And form’d a snowy circle on the grass,

				 				And plac’d in midst of all that lovely lass

				 				Who chosen is their queen,⁠—with her fine head

				 				Crownèd with flowers purple, white, and red.

				 				For there the lily, and the musk-rose, sighing,

				 				Are emblems true of hapless lovers dying;

				 				Between her breasts, that never yet felt trouble,

				 				A bunch of violets full blown, and double,

				 				Serenely sleep:⁠—she from a casket takes

				 				A little book,⁠—and then a joy awakes

				 				About each youthful heart,⁠—with stifled cries,

				 				And rubbing of white hands, and sparkling eyes:

				 				For she’s to read a tale of hopes and fears;

				 				One that I foster’d in my youthful years:

				 				The pearls, that on each glist’ning circlet sleep,

				 				Gush ever and anon with silent creep,

				 				Lured by the innocent dimples. To sweet rest

				 				Shall the dear babe, upon its mother’s breast,

				 				Be lull’d with songs of mine. Fair world, adieu!

				 				Thy dales and hills are falling from my view:

				 				Swiftly I mount, upon wide-spreading pinions,

				 				Far from the narrow bounds of thy dominions.

				 				Full joy I feel, while thus I cleave the air,

				 				That my soft verse will charm thy daughters fair.

				 				And warm thy sons!” Ah, my dear friend and brother,

				 				Could I, at once, my mad ambition smother,

				 				For tasting joys like these, sure I should be

				 				Happier, and dearer to society.

				 				At times, ’tis true, I’ve felt relief from pain

				 				When some bright thought has darted through my brain:

				 				Through all that day I’ve felt a greater pleasure

				 				Than if I’d brought to light a hidden treasure.

				 				As to my sonnets, though none else should heed them,

				 				I feel delighted, still, that you should read them.

				 				Of late, too, I have had much calm enjoyment,

				 				Stretch’d on the grass at my best lov’d employment

				 				Of scribbling lines for you. These things I thought

				 				While, in my face, thy freshest breeze I caught.

				 				E’en now I’m pillow’d on a bed of flowers

				 				That crowns a lofty cliff, which proudly towers

				 				Above the ocean waves. The stalks and blades

				 				Chequer my tablet with their quivering shades.

				 				On one side is a field of drooping oats,

				 				Through which the poppies show their scarlet coats;

				 				So pert and useless, that they bring to mind

				 				The scarlet coats that pester human-kind.

				 				And on the other side, outspread, is seen

				 				Ocean’s blue mantle, streak’d with purple, and green;

				 				Now ’tis I see a canvass’d ship, and now

				 				Mark the bright silver curling round her prow.

				 				I see the lark down-dropping to his nest,

				 				And the broad-winged sea-gull never at rest;

				 				For when no more he spreads his feathers free,

				 				His breast is dancing on the restless sea.

				 				Now I direct my eyes into the west,

				 				Which at this moment is in sunbeams drest:

				 				Why westward turn? ’Twas but to say adieu!

				 				’Twas but to kiss my hand, dear George, to you!





Epistle to Charles Cowden Clarke


			 				Oft have you seen a swan superbly frowning,

				 				And with proud breast his own white shadow crowning;

				 				He slants his neck beneath the waters bright

				 				So silently, it seems a beam of light

				 				Come from the galaxy: anon he sports,⁠—

				 				With outspread wings the Naiad Zephyr courts,

				 				Or ruffles all the surface of the lake

				 				In striving from its crystal face to take

				 				Some diamond water-drops, and them to treasure

				 				In milky nest, and sip them off at leisure.

				 				But not a moment can he there insure them,

				 				Nor to such downy rest can he allure them;

				 				For down they rush as though they would be free,

				 				And drop like hours into eternity.

				 				Just like that bird am I in loss of time,

				 				Whene’er I venture on the stream of rhyme;

				 				With shatter’d boat, oar snapt, and canvas rent,

				 				I slowly sail, scarce knowing my intent;

				 				Still scooping up the water with my fingers,

				 				In which a trembling diamond never lingers.



			 				By this, friend Charles, you may full plainly see

				 				Why I have never penn’d a line to thee:

				 				Because my thoughts were never free, and clear,

				 				And little fit to please a classic ear;

				 				Because my wine was of too poor a savour

				 				For one whose palate gladdens in the flavour

				 				Of sparkling Helicon:⁠—small good it were

				 				To take him to a desert rude, and bare,

				 				Who had on Baiæ’s shore reclin’d at ease,

				 				While Tasso’s page was floating in a breeze

				 				That gave soft music from Armida’s bowers,

				 				Mingled with fragrance from her rarest flowers:

				 				Small good to one who had by Mulla’s stream

				 				Fondled the maidens with the breasts of cream;

				 				Who had beheld Belphœbe in a brook,

				 				And lovely Una in a leafy nook,

				 				And Archimago leaning o’er his book:

				 				Who had of all that’s sweet tasted, and seen,

				 				From silv’ry ripple, up to beauty’s queen;

				 				From the sequester’d haunts of gay Titania,

				 				To the blue dwelling of divine Urania:

				 				One, who of late had ta’en sweet forest walks

				 				With him who elegantly chats and talks⁠—

				 				The wrong’d Libertas,⁠—who has told you stories

				 				Of laurel chaplets, and Apollo’s glories;

				 				Of troops chivalrous prancing through a city,

				 				And tearful ladies made for love, and pity:

				 				With many else which I have never known.

				 				Thus have I thought; and days on days have flown

				 				Slowly, or rapidly⁠—unwilling stilly

				 				For you to try my dull, unlearned quill.

				 				Nor should I now, but that I’ve known you long;

				 				That you first taught me all the sweets of song:

				 				The grand, the sweet, the terse, the free, the fine:

				 				What swell’d with pathos, and what right divine:

				 				Spenserian vowels that elope with ease,

				 				And float along like birds o’er summer seas:

				 				Miltonian storms, and more, Miltonian tenderness:

				 				Michael in arms, and more, meek Eve’s fair slenderness.

				 				Who read for me the sonnet swelling loudly

				 				Up to its climax, and then dying proudly?

				 				Who found for me the grandeur of the ode,

				 				Growing, like Atlas, stronger from its load?

				 				Who let me taste that more than cordial dram,

				 				The sharp, the rapier-pointed epigram?

				 				Show’d me that epic was of all the king,

				 				Round, vast, and spanning all, like Saturn’s ring?

				 				You too upheld the veil from Clio’s beauty,

				 				And pointed out the patriot’s stern duty;

				 				The might of Alfred, and the shaft of Tell;

				 				The hand of Brutus, that so grandly fell

				 				Upon a tyrant’s head. Ah! had I never seen,

				 				Or known your kindness, what might I have been?

				 				What my enjoyments in my youthful years,

				 				Bereft of all that now my life endears?

				 				And can I e’er these benefits forget?

				 				And can I e’er repay the friendly debt?

				 				No, doubly no;⁠—yet should these rhymings please,

				 				I shall roll on the grass with twofold ease;

				 				For I have long time been my fancy feeding

				 				With hopes that you would one day think the reading

				 				Of my rough verses not an hour misspent;

				 				Should it e’er be so, what a rich content!

				 				Some weeks have pass’d since last I saw the spires

				 				In lucent Thames reflected:⁠—warm desires

				 				To see the sun o’er-peep the eastern dimness

				 				And morning shadows streaking into slimness,

				 				Across the lawny fields, and pebbly water;

				 				To mark the time as they grow broad, and shorter;

				 				To feel the air that plays about the hills,

				 				And sips its freshness from the little rills;

				 				To see high, golden corn wave in the light

				 				When Cynthia smiles upon a summer’s night,

				 				And peers among the cloudlet’s jet and white,

				 				As though she were reclining in a bed

				 				Of bean blossoms, in heaven freshly shed.

				 				No sooner had I stepp’d into these pleasures,

				 				Than I began to think of rhymes and measures;

				 				The air that floated by me seem’d to say

				 				“Write! thou wilt never have a better day.”

				 				And so I did. When many lines I’d written,

				 				Though with their grace I was not oversmitten,

				 				Yet, as my hand was warm, I thought I’d better

				 				Trust to my feelings, and write you a letter.

				 				Such an attempt required an inspiration

				 				Of a peculiar sort,⁠—a consummation;⁠—

				 				Which, had I felt, these scribblings might have been

				 				Verses from which the soul would never wean;

				 				But many days have past since last my heart

				 				Was warm’d luxuriously by divine Mozart;

				 				By Arne delighted, or by Handel madden’d;

				 				Or by the song of Erin pierc’d and sadden’d:

				 				What time you were before the music sitting,

				 				And the rich notes to each sensation fitting.

				 				Since I have walk’d with you through shady lanes

				 				That freshly terminate in open plains,

				 				And revell’d in a chat that ceasèd not

				 				When at night-fall among your books we got:

				 				No, nor when supper came, nor after that,⁠—

				 				Nor when reluctantly I took my hat;

				 				No, nor till cordially you shook my hand

				 				Mid-way between our homes:⁠—your accents bland

				 				Still sounded in my ears, when I no more

				 				Could hear your footsteps touch the grav’ly floor.

				 				Sometimes I lost them, and then found again;

				 				You changed the foot-path for the grassy plain.

				 				In those still moments I have wish’d you joys

				 				That well you know to honour:⁠—“Life’s very toys

				 				With him,” said I, “will take a pleasant charm;

				 				It cannot be that ought will work him harm.”

				 				These thoughts now come o’er me with all their might:⁠—

				 				Again I shake your hand⁠—friend Charles, good night.





Sonnet


			 				Keen, fitful gusts are whisp’ring here and there

				 				Among the bushes half leafless, and dry;

				 				The stars look very cold about the sky,

				 				And I have many miles on foot to fare.

				 				Yet feel I little of the cool bleak air,

				 				Or of the dead leaves rustling drearily,

				 				Or of those silver lamps that burn on high,

				 				Or of the distance from home’s pleasant lair:

				 				For I am brimful of the friendliness

				 				That in a little cottage I have found;

				 				Of fair-hair’d Milton’s eloquent distress,

				 				And all his love for gentle Lycid drown’d;

				 				Of lovely Laura in her light green dress,

				 				And faithful Petrarch gloriously crown’d.





On Leaving Some Friends at an Early Hour


			 				Give me a golden pen, and let me lean

				 				On heap’d-up flowers, in regions clear and far;

				 				Bring me a tablet whiter than a star,

				 				Or hand of hymning angel, when ’tis seen

				 				The silver strings of heavenly harp atween:

				 				And let there glide by many a pearly car,

				 				Pink robes, and wavy hair, and diamond jar,

				 				And half-discover’d wings, and glances keen.

				 				The while let music wander round my ears,

				 				And as it reaches each delicious ending,

				 				Let me write down a line of glorious tone,

				 				And full of many wonders of the spheres:

				 				For what a height my spirit is contending!

				 				’Tis not content so soon to be alone.





To My Brothers


			 				Small, busy flames play through the fresh-laid coals,

				 				And their faint cracklings o’er our silence creep

				 				Like whispers of the household gods that keep

				 				A gentle empire o’er fraternal souls.

				 				And while, for rhymes, I search around the poles,

				 				Your eyes are fix’d, as in poetic sleep,

				 				Upon the lore so voluble and deep,

				 				That aye at fall of night our care condoles.

				 				This is your birth-day, Tom, and I rejoice

				 				That thus it passes smoothly, quietly:

				 				Many such eves of gently whisp’ring noise

				 				May we together pass, and calmly try

				 				What are this world’s true joys,⁠—ere the great Voice,

				 				From its fair face, shall bid our spirits fly.





Addressed to Benjamin Robert Haydon




I


				 					Great spirits now on earth are sojourning;

					 					He of the cloud, the cataract, the lake,

					 					Who on Helvellyn’s summit, wide awake,

					 					Catches his freshness from Archangel’s wing:

					 					He of the rose, the violet, the spring,

					 					The social smile, the chain for Freedom’s sake:

					 					And lo!⁠—whose steadfastness would never take

					 					A meaner sound than Raphael’s whispering.

					 					And other spirits there are standing apart

					 					Upon the forehead of the age to come;

					 					These, these will give the world another heart,

					 					And other pulses. Hear ye not the hum

					 					Of mighty workings in the human mart?

					 					Listen awhile ye nations, and be dumb.





II


				 					Highmindedness, a jealousy for good,

					 					A loving-kindness for the great man’s fame,

					 					Dwells here and there with people of no name,

					 					In noisome alley, and in pathless wood:

					 					And where we think the truth least understood,

					 					Oft may be found a “singleness of aim,”

					 					That ought to frighten into hooded shame

					 					A money-mong’ring, pitiable brood.

					 					How glorious this affection for the cause

					 					Of steadfast genius, toiling gallantly!

					 					What when a stout unbending champion awes

					 					Envy, and Malice to their native sty?

					 					Unnumber’d souls breathe out a still applause,

					 					Proud to behold him in his country’s eye.





Written in Disgust of Vulgar Superstition


			 				The church bells toll a melancholy round,

				 				Calling the people to some other prayers,

				 				Some other gloominess, more dreadful cares,

				 				More hearkening to the sermon’s horrid sound.

				 				Surely the mind of man is closely bound

				 				In some black spell; seeing that each one tears

				 				Himself from fireside joys, and Lydian airs,

				 				And converse high of those with glory crown’d.

				 				Still, still they toll, and I should feel a damp⁠—

				 				A chill as from a tomb, did I not know

				 				That they are dying like an outburnt lamp;

				 				That ’tis their sighing, wailing ere they go

				 				Into oblivion;⁠—that fresh flowers will grow,

				 				And many glories of immortal stamp.





To Kosciusko


			 				Good Kosciusko, thy great name alone

				 				Is a full harvest whence to reap high feeling;

				 				It comes upon us like the glorious pealing

				 				Of the wide spheres⁠—an everlasting tone.

				 				And now it tells me, that in worlds unknown,

				 				The names of heroes, burst from clouds concealing,

				 				Are changed to harmonies, for ever stealing

				 				Through cloudless blue, and round each silver throne.

				 				It tells me too, that on a happy day,

				 				When some good spirit walks upon the earth,

				 				Thy name with Alfred’s, and the great of yore,

				 				Gently commingling, gives tremendous birth

				 				To a loud hymn, that sounds far, far away

				 				To where the great God lives for evermore.





On the Grasshopper and Cricket


			 				The poetry of earth is never dead:

				 				When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,

				 				And hide in cooling trees; a voice will run

				 				From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead;

				 				That is the Grasshopper’s⁠—he takes the lead

				 				In summer luxury,⁠—he has never done

				 				With his delights; for when tired out with fun,

				 				He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.

				 				The poetry of earth is ceasing never:

				 				On a lone winter evening, when the frost

				 				Has wrought a silence, from the stove there shrills

				 				The Cricket’s song, in warmth increasing ever,

				 				And seems to one, in drowsiness half lost,

				 				The Grasshopper’s among some grassy hills.





Hymn to Apollo


			 				God of the golden bow,

				 				And of the golden lyre,

				 				And of the golden hair,

				 				And of the golden fire,

				 				Charioteer

				 				Of the patient year,

				 				Where⁠—where slept thine ire,

				 				When like a blank idiot I put on thy wreath,

				 				Thy laurel, thy glory,

				 				The light of thy story,

				 				Or was I a worm⁠—too low crawling, for death?

				 				O Delphic Apollo!



			 				The Thunderer grasp’d and grasp’d,

				 				The Thunderer frown’d and frown’d;

				 				The eagle’s feathery mane

				 				For wrath became stiffen’d⁠—the sound

				 				Of breeding thunder

				 				Went drowsily under,

				 				Muttering to be unbound.

				 				O why didst thou pity, and for a worm

				 				Why touch thy soft lute

				 				Till the thunder was mute,

				 				Why was not I crush’d⁠—such a pitiful germ?

				 				O Delphic Apollo!



			 				The Pleiades were up,

				 				Watching the silent air;

				 				The seeds and roots in the Earth

				 				Were swelling for summer fare;

				 				The Ocean, its neighbour,

				 				Was at its old labour,

				 				When, who⁠—who did dare

				 				To tie, like a madman, thy plant round his brow,

				 				And grin and look proudly,

				 				And blaspheme so loudly,

				 				And live for that honour, to stoop to thee now?

				 				O Delphic Apollo?





Sleep and Poetry


				 					 						As I lay in my bed slepe full unmete

						 						Was unto me, but why that I ne might

						 						Rest I ne wist, for there n’ as erthly wight

						 						(As I suppose) had more of hertis ese

						 						Than I, for I n’ ad sicknesse nor disese.



					Chaucer



				What is more gentle than a wind in summer?

				 				What is more soothing than the pretty hummer

				 				That stays one moment in an open flower,

				 				And buzzes cheerily from bower to bower?

				 				What is more tranquil than a musk-rose blowing

				 				In a green island, far from all men’s knowing?

				 				More healthful than the leafiness of dales?

				 				More secret than a nest of nightingales?

				 				More serene than Cordelia’s countenance?

				 				More full of visions than a high romance?

				 				What, but thee, Sleep? Soft closer of our eyes!

				 				Low murmurer of tender lullabies!

				 				Light hoverer around our happy pillows!

				 				Wreather of poppy buds, and weeping willows!

				 				Silent entangler of a beauty’s tresses!

				 				Most happy listener! when the morning blesses

				 				Thee for enlivening all the cheerful eyes

				 				That glance so brightly at the new sunrise.



			 				But what is higher beyond thought than thee?

				 				Fresher than berries of a mountain-tree?

				 				More strange, more beautiful, more smooth, more regal,

				 				Than wings of swans, than doves, than dim-seen eagle?

				 				What is it? And to what shall I compare it?

				 				It has a glory, and nought else can share it:

				 				The thought thereof is awful, sweet, and holy,

				 				Chasing away all worldliness and folly:

				 				Coming sometimes like fearful claps of thunder,

				 				Or the low rumblings earth’s regions under;

				 				And sometimes like a gentle whispering

				 				Of all the secrets of some wond’rous thing

				 				That breathes about us in the vacant air;

				 				So that we look around with prying stare,

				 				Perhaps to see shapes of light, aerial limning;

				 				And catch soft floatings from a faint-heard hymning;

				 				To see the laurel wreath, on high suspended,

				 				That is to crown our name when life is ended.

				 				Sometimes it gives a glory to the voice,

				 				And from the heart up-springs, rejoice! rejoice!

				 				Sounds which will reach the Framer of all things,

				 				And die away in ardent mutterings.



			 				No one who once the glorious sun has seen,

				 				And all the clouds, and felt his bosom clean

				 				For his great Maker’s presence, but must know

				 				What ’tis I mean, and feel his being glow:

				 				Therefore no insult will I give his spirit,

				 				By telling what he sees from native merit.



			 				O Poesy! for thee I hold my pen,

				 				That am not yet a glorious denizen

				 				Of thy wide heaven⁠—should I rather kneel

				 				Upon some mountain-top until I feel

				 				A growing splendour round about me hung,

				 				And echo back the voice of thine own tongue?

				 				O Poesy! for thee I grasp my pen,

				 				That am not yet a glorious denizen

				 				Of thy wide heaven; yet, to my ardent prayer,

				 				Yield from thy sanctuary some clear air,

				 				Smoothed for intoxication by the breath

				 				Of flowering bays, that I may die a death

				 				Of luxury, and my young spirit follow

				 				The morning sunbeams to the great Apollo

				 				Like a fresh sacrifice; or, if I can bear

				 				The o’erwhelming sweets, ’twill bring to me the fair

				 				Visions of all places: a bowery nook

				 				Will be elysium⁠—an eternal book

				 				Whence I may copy many a lovely saying

				 				About the leaves, and flowers⁠—about the playing

				 				Of nymphs in woods, and fountains; and the shade

				 				Keeping a silence round a sleeping maid;

				 				And many a verse from so strange influence

				 				That we must ever wonder how, and whence

				 				It came. Also imaginings will hover

				 				Round my fire-side, and haply there discover

				 				Vistas of solemn beauty, where I’d wander

				 				In happy silence, like the clear Meander

				 				Through its lone vales; and where I found a spot

				 				Of awfuller shade, or an enchanted grot,

				 				Or a green hill o’erspread with chequer’d dress

				 				Of flowers, and fearful from its loveliness,

				 				Write on my tablets all that was permitted,

				 				All that was for our human senses fitted.

				 				Then the events of this wide world I’d seize

				 				Like a strong giant, and my spirit tease

				 				Till at its shoulders it should proudly see

				 				Wings to find out an immortality.



			 				Stop and consider! life is but a day;

				 				A fragile dewdrop on its perilous way

				 				From a tree’s summit; a poor Indian’s sleep

				 				While his boat hastens to the monstrous steep

				 				Of Montmorenci. Why so sad a moan?

				 				Life is the rose’s hope while yet unblown;

				 				The reading of an ever-changing tale;

				 				The light uplifting of a maiden’s veil;

				 				A pigeon tumbling in clear summer air;

				 				A laughing school-boy, without grief or care,

				 				Riding the springy branches of an elm.



			 				O for ten years, that I may overwhelm

				 				Myself in poesy; so I may do the deed

				 				That my own soul has to itself decreed.

				 				Then I will pass the countries that I see

				 				In long perspective, and continually

				 				Taste their pure fountains. First the realm I’ll pass

				 				Of Flora, and old Pan: sleep in the grass,

				 				Feed upon apples red, and strawberries,

				 				And choose each pleasure that my fancy sees;

				 				Catch the white-handed nymphs in shady places,

				 				To woo sweet kisses from averted faces,⁠—

				 				Play with their fingers, touch their shoulders white

				 				Into a pretty shrinking with a bite

				 				As hard as lips can make it: till agreed,

				 				A lovely tale of human life we’ll read.

				 				And one will teach a tame dove how it best

				 				May fan the cool air gently o’er my rest;

				 				Another, bending o’er her nimble tread,

				 				Will set a green robe floating round her head,

				 				And still will dance with ever-varied ease,

				 				Smiling upon the flowers and the trees:

				 				Another will entice me on, and on

				 				Through almond blossoms and rich cinnamon;

				 				Till in the bosom of a leafy world

				 				We rest in silence, like two gems upcurl’d

				 				In the recesses of a pearly shell.



			 				And can I ever bid these joys farewell?

				 				Yes, I must pass them for a nobler life,

				 				Where I may find the agonies, the strife

				 				Of human hearts: for lo! I see afar,

				 				O’ersailing the blue cragginess, a car

				 				And steeds with streamy manes⁠—the charioteer

				 				Looks out upon the winds with glorious fear:

				 				And now the numerous tramplings quiver lightly

				 				Along a huge cloud’s ridge; and now with sprightly

				 				Wheel downward come they into fresher skies,

				 				Tipt round with silver from the sun’s bright eyes.

				 				Still downward with capacious whirl they glide;

				 				And now I see them on a green-hill’s side

				 				In breezy rest among the nodding stalks.

				 				The charioteer with wond’rous gesture talks

				 				To the trees and mountains; and there soon appear

				 				Shapes of delight, of mystery, and fear.

				 				Passing along before a dusky space

				 				Made by some mighty oaks: as they would chase

				 				Some ever-fleeting music, on they sweep.

				 				Lo! how they murmur, laugh, and smile, and weep:

				 				Some with upholden hand and mouth severe;

				 				Some with their faces muffled to the ear

				 				Between their arms; some, clear in youthful bloom,

				 				Go glad and smilingly athwart the gloom;

				 				Some looking back, and some with upward gaze;

				 				Yes, thousands in a thousand different ways

				 				Flit onward⁠—now a lovely wreath of girls

				 				Dancing their sleek hair into tangled curls;

				 				And now broad wings. Most awfully intent

				 				The driver of those steeds is forward bent,

				 				And seems to listen: O that I might know

				 				All that he writes with such a hurrying glow.



			 				The visions all are fled⁠—the car is fled

				 				Into the light of heaven, and in their stead

				 				A sense of real things comes doubly strong,

				 				And, like a muddy stream, would bear along

				 				My soul to nothingness: but I will strive

				 				Against all doubtings, and will keep alive

				 				The thought of that same chariot, and the strange

				 				Journey it went.



			 				Is there so small a range

				 				In the present strength of manhood, that the high

				 				Imagination cannot freely fly

				 				As she was wont of old? prepare her steeds,

				 				Paw up against the light, and do strange deeds

				 				Upon the clouds? Has she not shown us all?

				 				From the clear space of ether, to the small

				 				Breath of new buds unfolding? From the meaning

				 				Of Jove’s large eyebrow, to the tender greening

				 				Of April meadows? here her altar shone,

				 				E’en in this isle; and who could paragon

				 				The fervid choir that lifted up a noise

				 				Of harmony, to where it aye will poise

				 				Its mighty self of convoluting sound,

				 				Huge as a planet, and like that roll round,

				 				Eternally around a dizzy void?

				 				Ay, in those days the Muses were nigh cloy’d

				 				With honours; nor had any other care

				 				Than to sing out and soothe their wavy hair.



			 				Could all this be forgotten? Yes, a schism

				 				Nurtured by foppery and barbarism,

				 				Made great Apollo blush for this his land.

				 				Men were thought wise who could not understand

				 				His glories: with a puling infant’s force

				 				They sway’d about upon a rocking-horse,

				 				And thought it Pegasus. Ah, dismal-soul’d!

				 				The winds of heaven blew, the ocean roll’d

				 				Its gathering waves⁠—ye felt it not. The blue

				 				Bared its eternal bosom, and the dew

				 				Of summer nights collected still to make

				 				The morning precious: beauty was awake!

				 				Why were ye not awake? But ye were dead

				 				To things ye knew not of,⁠—were closely wed

				 				To musty laws lined out with wretched rule

				 				And compass vile: so that ye taught a school

				 				Of dolts to smooth, inlay, and clip, and fit,

				 				Till, like the certain wands of Jacob’s wit,

				 				Their verses tallied. Easy was the task:

				 				A thousand handicraftsmen wore the mask

				 				Of Poesy. Ill-fated, impious race!

				 				That blasphem’d the bright Lyrist to his face,

				 				And did not know it,⁠—no, they went about,

				 				Holding a poor, decrepid standard out,

				 				Mark’d with most flimsy mottoes, and in large

				 				The name of one Boileau!



			 				O ye whose charge

				 				It is to hover round our pleasant hills!

				 				Whose congregated majesty so fills

				 				My boundly reverence, that I cannot trace

				 				Your hallowed names, in this unholy place,

				 				So near those common folk; did not their shames

				 				Affright you? Did our old lamenting Thames

				 				Delight you? did ye never cluster round

				 				Delicious Avon, with a mournful sound,

				 				And weep? Or did ye wholly bid adieu

				 				To regions where no more the laurel grew?

				 				Or did ye stay to give a welcoming

				 				To some lone spirits who could proudly sing

				 				Their youth away, and die? ’Twas even so:

				 				But let me think away those times of woe:

				 				Now ’tis a fairer season; ye have breathed

				 				Rich benedictions o’er us; ye have wreathed

				 				Fresh garlands: for sweet music has been heard

				 				In many places;⁠—some has been upstirr’d

				 				From out its crystal dwelling in a lake,

				 				By a swan’s ebon bill; from a thick brake,

				 				Nested and quiet in a valley mild,

				 				Bubbles a pipe; fine sounds are floating wild

				 				About the earth: happy are ye and glad.

				 				These things are, doubtless; yet in truth we’ve had

				 				Strange thunders from the potency of song;

				 				Mingled indeed with what is sweet and strong

				 				From majesty: but in clear truth the themes

				 				Are ugly clubs, the Poets Polyphemes

				 				Disturbing the grand sea. A drainless shower

				 				Of light is Poesy; ’tis the supreme of power;

				 				’Tis might half slumb’ring on its own right arm.

				 				The very archings of her eyelids charm

				 				A thousand willing agents to obey,

				 				And still she governs with the mildest sway:

				 				But strength alone though of the Muses born

				 				Is like a fallen angel: trees uptorn,

				 				Darkness, and worms, and shrouds, and sepulchres

				 				Delight it; for it feeds upon the burrs

				 				And thorns of life; forgetting the great end

				 				Of Poesy, that it should be a friend

				 				To soothe the cares, and lift the thoughts of man.



			 				Yet I rejoice: a myrtle fairer than

				 				E’er grow in Paphos, from the bitter weeds

				 				Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds

				 				A silent space with ever sprouting green.

				 				All tenderest birds there find a pleasant screen,

				 				Creep through the shade with jaunty fluttering,

				 				Nibble the little cupped flowers and sing.

				 				Then let us clear away the choking thorns

				 				From round its gentle stem; let the young fawns,

				 				Yeanèd in after-times, when we are flown,

				 				Find a fresh sward beneath it, overgrown

				 				With simple flowers: let there nothing be

				 				More boisterous than a lover’s bended knee;

				 				Nought more ungentle than the placid look

				 				Of one who leans upon a closèd book;

				 				Nought more untranquil than the grassy slopes

				 				Between two hills. All hail, delightful hopes!

				 				As she was wont, th’ imagination

				 				Into most lovely labyrinths will be gone,

				 				And they shall be accounted poet kings

				 				Who simply tell the most heart-easing things.

				 				O may these joys be ripe before I die.



			 				Will not some say that I presumptuously

				 				Have spoken? that from hastening disgrace

				 				’Twere better far to hide my foolish face?

				 				That whining boyhood should with reverence bow

				 				Ere the dread thunderbolt could reach? How!

				 				If I do hide myself, it sure shall be

				 				In the very fane, the light of Poesy:

				 				If I do fall, at least I will be laid

				 				Beneath the silence of a poplar shade;

				 				And over me the grass shall be smooth shaven;

				 				And there shall be a kind memorial graven.

				 				But off, Despondence! miserable bane!

				 				They should not know thee, who athirst to gain

				 				A noble end, are thirsty every hour.

				 				What though I am not wealthy in the dower

				 				Of spanning wisdom; though I do not know

				 				The shiftings of the mighty winds that blow

				 				Hither and thither all the changing thoughts

				 				Of man: though no great minist’ring reason sorts

				 				Out the dark mysteries of human souls

				 				To clear conceiving: yet there ever rolls

				 				A vast idea before me, and I glean

				 				Therefrom my liberty; thence too I’ve seen

				 				The end and aim of Poesy. ’Tis clear

				 				As anything most true; as that the year

				 				Is made of the four seasons⁠—manifest

				 				As a large cross, some old cathedral’s crest.

				 				Lifted to the white clouds. Therefore should I

				 				Be but the essence of deformity,

				 				A coward, did my very eyelids wink

				 				At speaking out what I have dared to think.

				 				Ah! rather let me like a madman run

				 				Over some precipice; let the hot sun

				 				Melt my Dædalian wings, and drive me down

				 				Convuls’d and headlong! Stay! an inward frown

				 				Of conscience bids me be more calm awhile.

				 				An ocean dim, sprinkled with many an isle,

				 				Spreads awfully before me. How much toil!

				 				How many days! what desperate turmoil!

				 				Ere I can have explored its widenesses.

				 				Ah, what a task! upon my bended knees,

				 				I could unsay those⁠—no, impossible!

				 				Impossible!



			 				For sweet relief I’ll dwell

				 				On humbler thoughts, and let this strange assay

				 				Begun in gentleness die so away.

				 				E’en now all tumult from my bosom fades:

				 				I turn full-hearted to the friendly aids

				 				That smooth the path of honour; brotherhood,

				 				And friendliness the nurse of mutual good.

				 				The hearty grasp that sends a pleasant sonnet

				 				Into the brain ere one can think upon it;

				 				The silence when some rhymes are coming out;

				 				And when they’re come, the very pleasant rout:

				 				The message certain to be done to-morrow.

				 				’Tis perhaps as well that it should be to borrow

				 				Some precious book from out its snug retreat,

				 				To cluster round it when we next shall meet.

				 				Scarce can I scribble on; for lovely airs

				 				Are fluttering round the room like doves in pairs;

				 				Many delights of that glad day recalling,

				 				When first my senses caught their tender falling.

				 				And with these airs come forms of elegance

				 				Stooping their shoulders o’er a horse’s prance,

				 				Careless, and grand⁠—fingers soft and round

				 				Parting luxuriant curls;⁠—and the swift bound

				 				Of Bacchus from his chariot, when his eye

				 				Made Ariadne’s cheek look blushingly.

				 				Thus I remember all the pleasant flow

				 				Of words at opening a portfolio.



			 				Things such as these are ever harbingers

				 				To trains of peaceful images: the stirs

				 				Of a swan’s neck unseen among the rushes:

				 				A linnet starting all about the bushes:

				 				A butterfly, with golden wings broad parted,

				 				Nestling a rose, convuls’d as though it smarted

				 				With over pleasure⁠—many, many more,

				 				Might I indulge at large in all my store

				 				Of luxuries: yet I must not forget

				 				Sleep, quiet with his poppy coronet:

				 				For what there may be worthy in these rhymes

				 				I partly owe to him: and thus, the chimes

				 				Of friendly voices had just given place

				 				To as sweet a silence, when I ’gan retrace

				 				The pleasant day, upon a couch at ease.

				 				It was a poet’s house who keeps the keys

				 				Of pleasure’s temple. Round about were hung

				 				The glorious features of the bards who sung

				 				In other ages⁠—cold and sacred busts

				 				Smiled at each other. Happy he who trusts

				 				To clear Futurity his darling fame!

				 				Then there were fauns and satyrs taking aim

				 				At swelling apples with a frisky leap

				 				And reaching fingers, ’mid a luscious heap

				 				Of vine leaves. Then there rose to view a fane

				 				Of liny marble, and thereto a train

				 				Of nymphs approaching fairly o’er the sward:

				 				One, loveliest, holding her white hand toward

				 				The dazzling sunrise: two sisters sweet

				 				Bending their graceful figures till they meet

				 				Over the trippings of a little child:

				 				And some are hearing, eagerly, the wild

				 				Thrilling liquidity of dewy piping.

				 				See, in another picture, nymphs are wiping

				 				Cherishingly Diana’s timorous limbs;⁠—

				 				A fold of lawny mantle dabbling swims

				 				At the bath’s edge, and keeps a gentle motion

				 				With the subsiding crystal: as when ocean

				 				Heaves calmly its broad swelling smoothiness o’er

				 				Its rocky marge, and balances once more

				 				The patient weeds; that now unshent by foam

				 				Feel all about their undulating home.



			 				Sappho’s meek head was there half smiling down

				 				At nothing; just as though the earnest frown

				 				Of over-thinking had that moment gone

				 				From off her brow, and left her all alone.



			 				Great Alfred’s too, with anxious, pitying eyes,

				 				As if he always listened to the sighs

				 				Of the goaded world; and Kosciusko’s, worn

				 				By horrid suffrance⁠—mightily forlorn.



			 				Petrarch, outstepping from the shady green,

				 				Starts at the sight of Laura; nor can wean

				 				His eyes from her sweet face. Most happy they!

				 				For over them was seen a free display

				 				Of outspread wings, and from between them shone

				 				The face of Poesy: from off her throne

				 				She overlook’d things that I scarce could tell.

				 				The very sense of where I was might well

				 				Keep Sleep aloof: but more than that there came

				 				Thought after thought to nourish up the flame

				 				Within my breast; so that the morning light

				 				Surprised me even from a sleepless night;

				 				And up I rose refresh’d, and glad, and gay,

				 				Resolving to begin that very day

				 				These lines; and howsoever they be done,

				 				I leave them as a father does his son.





“I Stood Tiptoe Upon a Little Hill”


				 					“Places of nestling green, for poets made.”

					Leigh Hunt, The Story of Rimini



				I stood tiptoe upon a little hill,

				 				The air was cooling, and so very still

				 				That the sweet buds which with a modest pride

				 				Pull droopingly, in slanting curve aside,

				 				Their scantly-leaved and finely tapering stems,

				 				Had not yet lost those starry diadems

				 				Caught from the early sobbing of the morn.

				 				The clouds were pure and white as flocks new shorn,

				 				And fresh from the clear brook; sweetly they slept

				 				On the blue fields of heaven, and then there crept

				 				A little noiseless noise among the leaves,

				 				Born of the very sigh that silence heaves;

				 				For not the faintest motion could be seen

				 				Of all the shades that slanted o’er the green.

				 				There was wide wand’ring for the greediest eye

				 				To peer about upon variety;

				 				Far round the horizon’s crystal air to skim,

				 				And trace the dwindled edgings of its brim;

				 				To picture out the quaint and curious bending

				 				Of a fresh woodland alley, never-ending;

				 				Or by the bowery clefts, and leafy shelves,

				 				Guess where the jaunty streams refresh themselves.

				 				I gazed awhile, and felt as light and free

				 				As though the fanning wings of Mercury

				 				Had played upon my heels: I was light-hearted,

				 				And many pleasures to my vision started;

				 				So I straightway began to pluck a posey

				 				Of luxuries bright, milky, soft, and rosy.



			 				A bush of May flowers with the bees about them;

				 				Ah, sure no tasteful nook could be without them;

				 				And let a lush laburnum oversweep them,

				 				And let long grass grow round the roots to keep them

				 				Moist, cool, and green; and shade the violets,

				 				That they may bind the moss in leafy nets.



			 				A filbert hedge with wild briar overtwined,

				 				And clumps of woodbine taking the soft wind

				 				Upon their summer thrones; there too should be

				 				The frequent chequer of a youngling tree,

				 				That with a score of light green brethren shoots

				 				From the quaint mossiness of aged roots:

				 				Round which is heard a spring-head of clear waters

				 				Babbling so wildly of its lovely daughters

				 				The spreading blue-bells: it may haply mourn

				 				That such fair clusters should be rudely torn

				 				From their fresh beds, and scattered thoughtlessly

				 				By infant hands, left on the path to die.



			 				Open afresh your round of starry folds,

				 				Ye ardent marigolds!

				 				Dry up the moisture from your golden lids,

				 				For great Apollo bids

				 				That in these days your praises should be sung

				 				On many harps, which he has lately strung;

				 				And when again your dewiness he kisses,

				 				Tell him, I have you in my world of blisses:

				 				So haply when I rove in some far vale,

				 				His mighty voice may come upon the gale.



			 				Here are sweet peas, on tiptoe for a flight:

				 				With wings of gentle flush o’er delicate white,

				 				And taper fingers catching at all things,

				 				To bind them all about with tiny rings.



			 				Linger awhile upon some bending planks

				 				That lean against a streamlet’s rushy banks,

				 				And watch intently Nature’s gentle doings:

				 				They will be found softer than ring-dove’s cooings.

				 				How silent comes the water round that bend;

				 				Not the minutest whisper does it send

				 				To the o’erhanging sallows: blades of grass

				 				Slowly across the chequer’d shadows pass.

				 				Why, you might read two sonnets, ere they reach

				 				To where the hurrying freshnesses aye preach

				 				A natural sermon o’er their pebbly beds;

				 				Where swarms of minnows show their little heads,

				 				Staying their wavy bodies ’gainst the streams,

				 				To taste the luxury of sunny beams

				 				Temper’d with coolness. How they ever wrestle

				 				With their own sweet delight, and ever nestle

				 				Their silver bellies on the pebbly sand.

				 				If you but scantily hold out the hand,

				 				That very instant not one will remain;

				 				But turn your eye, and they are there again.

				 				The ripples seem right glad to reach those cresses,

				 				And cool themselves among the em’rald tresses;

				 				The while they cool themselves, they freshness give,

				 				And moisture, that the bowery green may live:

				 				So keeping up an interchange of favours,

				 				Like good men in the truth of their behaviours.

				 				Sometimes goldfinches one by one will drop

				 				From low-hung branches; little space they stop;

				 				But sip, and twitter, and their feathers sleek;

				 				Then off at once, as in a wanton freak:

				 				Or perhaps, to show their black and golden wings,

				 				Pausing upon their yellow flutterings.

				 				Were I in such a place, I sure should pray

				 				That nought less sweet might call my thoughts away,

				 				Than the soft rustle of a maiden’s gown

				 				Fanning away the dandelion’s down;

				 				Than the light music of her nimble toes

				 				Patting against the sorrel as she goes.

				 				How she would start, and blush, thus to be caught

				 				Playing in all her innocence of thought.

				 				O let me lead her gently o’er the brook,

				 				Watch her half-smiling lips, and downward look;

				 				O let me for one moment touch her wrist;

				 				Let me one moment to her breathing list;

				 				And as she leaves me, may she often turn

				 				Her fair eyes looking through her locks auburne.

				 				What next? A tuft of evening primroses,

				 				O’er which the mind may hover till it dozes;

				 				O’er which it well might take a pleasant sleep,

				 				But that ’tis ever startled by the leap

				 				Of buds into ripe flowers; or by the flitting

				 				Of diverse moths, that aye their rest are quitting;

				 				Or by the moon lifting her silver rim

				 				Above a cloud, and with a gradual swim

				 				Coming into the blue with all her light.

				 				O Maker of sweet poets, dear delight

				 				Of this fair world, and all its gentle livers;

				 				Spangler of clouds, halo of crystal rivers,

				 				Mingler with leaves, and dew and tumbling streams,

				 				Closer of lovely eyes to lovely dreams,

				 				Lover of loneliness, and wandering,

				 				Of upcast eye, and tender pondering!

				 				Thee must I praise above all other glories

				 				That smile us on to tell delightful stories.

				 				For what has made the sage or poet write

				 				But the fair paradise of Nature’s light?

				 				In the calm grandeur of a sober line,

				 				We see the waving of the mountain pine;

				 				And when a tale is beautifully staid,

				 				We feel the safety of a hawthorn glade:

				 				When it is moving on luxurious wings,

				 				The soul is lost in pleasant smotherings:

				 				Fair dewy roses brush against our faces,

				 				And flowering laurels spring from diamond vases;

				 				O’erhead we see the jasmine and sweet-briar,

				 				And bloomy grapes laughing from green attire;

				 				While at our feet, the voice of crystal bubbles

				 				Charms us at once away from all our troubles:

				 				So that we feel uplifted from the world,

				 				Walking upon the white clouds wreath’d and curl’d.

				 				So felt he, who first told, how Psyche went

				 				On the smooth wind to realms of wonderment;

				 				What Psyche felt, and Love, when their full lips

				 				First touch’d; what amorous and fondling nips

				 				They gave each other’s cheeks; with all their sighs,

				 				And how they kist each other’s tremulous eyes:

				 				The silver lamp,⁠—the ravishment,⁠—the wonder,⁠—

				 				The darkness,⁠—loneliness,⁠—the fearful thunder;

				 				Their woes gone by, and both to heaven upflown,

				 				To bow for gratitude before Jove’s throne.

				 				So did he feel, who pull’d the boughs aside,

				 				That we might look into a forest wide,

				 				To catch a glimpse of Fauns, and Dryades

				 				Coming with softest rustle through the trees;

				 				And garlands woven of flowers wild, and sweet,

				 				Upheld on ivory wrists, or sporting feet:

				 				Telling us how fair, trembling Syrinx fled

				 				Arcadian Pan, with such a fearful dread.

				 				Poor Nymph,⁠—poor Pan,⁠—how he did weep to find

				 				Nought but a lovely sighing of the wind

				 				Along the reedy stream; a half-heard strain,

				 				Full of sweet desolation⁠—balmy pain.



			 				What first inspired a bard of old to sing

				 				Narcissus pining o’er the untainted spring?

				 				In some delicious ramble, he had found

				 				A little space, with boughs all woven round;

				 				And in the midst of all, a clearer pool

				 				Than e’er reflected in its pleasant cool,

				 				The blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping

				 				Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping.

				 				And on the bank a lonely flower he spied,

				 				A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,

				 				Drooping its beauty o’er the watery clearness,

				 				To woo its own sad image into nearness:

				 				Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move;

				 				But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love.

				 				So while the Poet stood in this sweet spot,

				 				Some fainter gleamings o’er his fancy shot;

				 				Nor was it long ere he had told the tale

				 				Of young Narcissus, and sad Echo’s bale.



			 				Where had he been, from whose warm head out-flew

				 				That sweetest of all songs, that ever new,

				 				That aye refreshing, pure deliciousness,

				 				Coming ever to bless

				 				The wanderer by moonlight? to him bringing

				 				Shapes from the invisible world, unearthly singing

				 				From out the middle air, from flowery nests,

				 				And from the pillowy silkiness that rests

				 				Full in the speculation of the stars.

				 				Ah! surely he had burst our mortal bars;

				 				Into some wond’rous region he had gone,

				 				To search for thee, divine Endymion!



			 				He was a Poet, sure a lover too,

				 				Who stood on Latmus’ top, what time there blew

				 				Soft breezes from the myrtle vale below;

				 				And brought in faintness solemn, sweet, and slow

				 				A hymn from Dian’s temple; while upswelling,

				 				The incense went to her own starry dwelling.

				 				But though her face was clear as infant’s eyes,

				 				Though she stood smiling o’er the sacrifice,

				 				The Poet wept at her so piteous fate,

				 				Wept that such beauty should be desolate:

				 				So in fine wrath some golden sounds he won,

				 				And gave meek Cynthia her Endymion.



			 				Queen of the wide air; thou most lovely queen

				 				Of all the brightness that mine eyes have seen!

				 				As thou exceedest all things in thy shine,

				 				So every tale, does this sweet tale of thine.

				 				O for three words of honey, that I might

				 				Tell but one wonder of thy bridal night!



			 				Where distant ships do seem to show their keels,

				 				Phœbus awhile delay’d his mighty wheels,

				 				And turn’d to smile upon thy bashful eyes,

				 				Ere he his unseen pomp would solemnize.

				 				The evening weather was so bright, and clear,

				 				That men of health were of unusual cheer;

				 				Stepping like Homer at the trumpet’s call,

				 				Or young Apollo on the pedestal:

				 				And lovely women were as fair and warm,

				 				As Venus looking sideways in alarm.

				 				The breezes were ethereal, and pure,

				 				And crept through half closed lattices to cure

				 				The languid sick; it cool’d their fever’d sleep,

				 				And soothed them into slumbers full and deep.

				 				Soon they awoke clear-eyed: nor burnt with thirsting,

				 				Nor with hot fingers, nor with temples bursting:

				 				And springing up, they met the wond’ring sight

				 				Of their dear friends, nigh foolish with delight;

				 				Who feel their arms, and breasts, and kiss and stare,

				 				And on their placid foreheads part the hair.

				 				Young men and maidens at each other gaz’d,

				 				With hands held back, and motionless, amaz’d

				 				To see the brightness in each other’s eyes;

				 				And so they stood, fill’d with a sweet surprise,

				 				Until their tongues were loos’d in poesy.

				 				Therefore no lover did of anguish die:

				 				But the soft numbers, in that moment spoken,

				 				Made silken ties, that never may be broken.

				 				Cynthia! I cannot tell the greater blisses

				 				That follow’d thine, and thy dear shepherd’s kisses:

				 				Was there a Poet born?⁠—But now no more,

				 				My wand’ring spirit must no further soar.





Sonnet


			 				After dark vapours have oppress’d our plains

				 				For a long dreary season, comes a day

				 				Born of the gentle South, and clears away

				 				From the sick heavens all unseemly stains.

				 				The anxious month, relieved its pains,

				 				Takes as a long-lost right the feel of May;

				 				The eyelids with the passing coolness play,

				 				Like rose leaves with the drip of summer rains.

				 				And calmest thoughts come round us; as, of leaves

				 				Budding,⁠—fruit ripening in stillness,⁠—Autumn suns

				 				Smiling at eve upon the quiet sheaves,⁠—

				 				Sweet Sappho’s cheek,⁠—a sleeping infant’s breath,⁠—

				 				The gradual sand that through an hour-glass runs,⁠—

				 				A woodland rivulet,⁠—a Poet’s death.





Written on the Blank Space at the End of Chaucer’s Tale of The Floure and the Lefe


			 				This pleasant tale is like a little copse:

				 				The honied lines so freshly interlace,

				 				To keep the reader in so sweet a place,

				 				So that he here and there full-hearted stops;

				 				And oftentimes he feels the dewy drops

				 				Come cool and suddenly against his face,

				 				And, by the wandering melody, may trace

				 				Which way the tender-legged linnet hops.

				 				Oh! what a power has white simplicity!

				 				What mighty power has this gentle story!

				 				I, that do ever feel athirst for glory,

				 				Could at this moment be content to lie

				 				Meekly upon the grass, as those whose sobbings

				 				Were heard of none beside the mournful robins.





To Haydon


			 				Haydon! forgive me that I cannot speak

				 				Definitively of these mighty things;

				 				Forgive me, that I have not Eagle’s wings⁠—

				 				That what I want I know not where to seek:

				 				And think that I would not be over meek,

				 				In rolling out upfollow’d thunderings,

				 				Even to the steep of Heliconian springs,

				 				Were I of ample strength for such a freak⁠—

				 				Think too, that all those numbers should be thine;

				 				Whose else? In this who touch thy vesture’s hem?

				 				For when men star’d at what was most divine

				 				With browless idiotism⁠—o’erwise phlegm⁠—

				 				Thou hadst beheld the Hesperean shine

				 				Of their star in the East, and gone to worship them.





On Seeing the Elgin Marbles


			 				My spirit is too weak⁠—mortality

				 				Weighs heavily on me like unwilling sleep,

				 				And each imagin’d pinnacle and steep

				 				Of godlike hardship tells me I must die

				 				Like a sick Eagle looking at the sky.

				 				Yet ’tis a gentle luxury to weep

				 				That I have not the cloudy winds to keep,

				 				Fresh for the opening of the morning’s eye.

				 				Such dim-conceivèd glories of the brain

				 				Bring round the heart an indescribable feud;

				 				So do these wonders a most dizzy pain,

				 				That mingles Grecian grandeur with the rude

				 				Wasting of old Time⁠—with a billowy main⁠—

				 				A sun⁠—a shadow of a magnitude.





On Leigh Hunt’s Poem, The Story of Rimini


			 				Who loves to peer up at the morning sun,

				 				With half-shut eyes and comfortable cheek,

				 				Let him, with this sweet tale, full often seek

				 				For meadows where the little rivers run;

				 				Who loves to linger with that brightest one

				 				Of Heaven⁠—Hesperus⁠—let him lowly speak

				 				These numbers to the night, and starlight meek,

				 				Or moon, if that her hunting be begun.

				 				He who knows these delights, and too is prone

				 				To moralize upon a smile or tear,

				 				Will find at once a region of his own,

				 				A bower for his spirit, and will steer

				 				To alleys, where the fir-tree drops its cone,

				 				Where robins hop, and fallen leaves are sear.





				To Leigh Hunt, Esq. 				A Dedication




			 				Glory and loveliness have pass’d away;

				 				For if we wander ont in early morn,

				 				No wreathèd incense do we see upborne

				 				Into the east, to meet the smiling day:

				 				No crowd of nymphs soft-voic’d and young, and gay,

				 				In woven baskets bringing ears of corn,

				 				Roses, and pinks, and violets, to adorn

				 				The shrine of Flora in her early May.

				 				But there are left delights as high as these,

				 				And I shall ever bless my destiny,

				 				That in a time, when under pleasant trees

				 				Pan is no longer sought, I feel a free,

				 				A leafy luxury, seeing I could please

				 				With these poor offerings, a man like thee.





On the Sea


			 				It keeps eternal whisperings around

				 				Desolate shores, and with its mighty swell

				 				Gluts twice ten thousand caverns, till the spell

				 				Of Hecate leaves them their old shadowy sound.

				 				Often ’tis in such gentle temper found,

				 				That scarcely will the very smallest shell

				 				Be mov’d for days from where it sometime fell,

				 				When last the winds of Heaven were unbound.

				 				O ye! who have your eyeballs vex’d and tir’d,

				 				Feast them upon the wideness of the Sea;

				 				O ye! whose ears are dinn’d with uproar rude,

				 				Or fed too much with cloying melody,—

				 				Sit ye near some old cavern’s mouth, and brood

				 				Until ye start, as if the sea-nymphs quired!





Endymion


				 					“The stretched metre of an antique song.”

					Shakspeare’s Sonnets



					 						Inscribed

						 						with every feeling of pride and regret

						 						and with “a bowed mind”

						 						to the memory of

						 						the most English of poets except Shakspeare,

						 						Thomas Chatterton





Preface


				Knowing within myself the manner in which this Poem has been produced, it is not without a feeling of regret that I make it public.

				What manner I mean, will be quite clear to the reader, who must soon perceive great inexperience, immaturity, and every error denoting a feverish attempt, rather than a deed accomplished. The two first books, and indeed the two last, I feel sensible are not of such completion as to warrant their passing the press; nor should they if I thought a year’s castigation would do them any good;⁠—it will not: the foundations are too sandy. It is just that this youngster should die away: a sad thought for me, if I had not some hope that while it is dwindling I may be plotting, and fitting myself for verses fit to live.

				This may be speaking too presumptuously, and may deserve a punishment: but no feeling man will be forward to inflict it: he will leave me alone, with the conviction that there is not a fiercer hell than the failure in a great object. This is not written with the least atom of purpose to forestall criticisms of course, but from the desire I have to conciliate men who are competent to look, and who do look with a zealous eye, to the honour of English literature.

				The imagination of a boy is healthy, and the mature imagination of a man is healthy; but there is a space of life between, in which the soul is in a ferment, the character undecided, the way of life uncertain, the ambition thick-sighted: thence proceeds mawkishness, and all the thousand bitters which those men I speak of must necessarily taste in going over the following pages.

				I hope I have not in too late a day touched the beautiful mythology of Greece, and dulled its brightness: for I wish to try once more, before I bid it farewell.

				 					Teignmouth, April 10, 1818.





I


				 					A thing of beauty is a joy for ever:

					 					Its loveliness increases; it will never

					 					Pass into nothingness; but still will keep

					 					A bower quiet for us, and a sleep

					 					Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing.

					 					Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing

					 					A flowery band to bind us to the earth,

					 					Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth

					 					Of noble natures, of the gloomy days,

					 					Of all the unhealthy and o’er-darken’d ways

					 					Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all,

					 					Some shape of beauty moves away the pall

					 					From our dark spirits. Such the sun, the moon,

					 					Trees old and young, sprouting a shady boon

					 					For simple sheep; and such are daffodils

					 					With the green world they live in; and clear rills

					 					That for themselves a cooling covert make

					 					’Gainst the hot season; the mid-forest brake,

					 					Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms:

					 					And such too is the grandeur of the dooms

					 					We have imagined for the mighty dead;

					 					All lovely tales that we have heard or read:

					 					An endless fountain of immortal drink,

					 					Pouring unto us from the heaven’s brink.



				 					Nor do we merely feel these essences

					 					For one short hour; no, even as the trees

					 					That whisper round a temple become soon

					 					Dear as the temple’s self, so does the moon,

					 					The passion poesy, glories infinite,

					 					Haunt us till they become a cheering light

					 					Unto our souls, and bound to us so fast,

					 					That, whether there be shine, or gloom o’ercast,

					 					They alway must be with us, or we die.



				 					Therefore ’tis with full happiness that I

					 					Will trace the story of Endymion.

					 					The very music of the name has gone

					 					Into my being, and each pleasant scene

					 					Is growing fresh before me as the green

					 					Of our own valleys: so I will begin

					 					Now while I cannot hear the city’s din;

					 					Now while the early budders are just new,

					 					And run in mazes of the youngest hue

					 					About old forests; while the willow trails

					 					Its delicate amber; and the dairy pails

					 					Bring home increase of milk. And, as the year

					 					Grows lush in juicy stalks, I’ll smoothly steer

					 					My little boat, for many quiet hours,

					 					With streams that deepen freshly into bowers.

					 					Many and many a verse I hope to write,

					 					Before the daisies, vermeil rimm’d and white,

					 					Hide in deep herbage; and ere yet the bees

					 					Hum about globes of clover and sweet peas,

					 					I must be near the middle of my story.

					 					O may no wintry season, bare, and hoary,

					 					See it half-finish’d: but let Autumn bold.

					 					With universal tinge of sober gold,

					 					Be all about me when I make an end.

					 					And now at once, adventuresome, I send

					 					My herald thought into a wilderness:

					 					There let its trumpet blow, and quickly dress

					 					My uncertain path with green, that I may speed

					 					Easily onward, thorough flowers and weed.



				 					Upon the sides of Latmos was outspread

					 					A mighty forest: for the moist earth fed

					 					So plenteously all weed-hidden roots

					 					Into o’erhanging boughs, and precious fruits.

					 					And it had gloomy shades, sequestered deep,

					 					Where no man went; and if from shepherd’s keep

					 					A lamb stray’d far a-down those inmost glens,

					 					Never again saw he the happy pens

					 					Whither his brethren, bleating with content,

					 					Over the hills at every nightfall went.

					 					Among the shepherds, ’twas believed ever,

					 					That not one fleecy lamb which thus did sever

					 					From the white flock, but pass’d unworrièd

					 					By angry wolf, or pard with prying head,

					 					Until it came to some unfooted plains

					 					Where fed the herds of Pan: aye great his gains

					 					Who thus one lamb did lose. Paths there were many,

					 					Winding through palmy fern, and rushes fenny,

					 					And ivy banks; all leading pleasantly

					 					To a wide lawn, whence one could only see

					 					Stems thronging all around between the swell

					 					Of turf and slanting branches: who could tell

					 					The freshness of the space of heaven above,

					 					Edged round with dark tree-tops? through which a dove

					 					Would often beat its wings, and often too

					 					A little cloud would move across the blue.



				 					Full in the middle of this pleasantness

					 					There stood a marble altar, with a tress

					 					Of flowers budded newly; and the dew

					 					Had taken fairy phantasies to strew

					 					Daisies upon the sacred sward last eve,

					 					And so the dawned light in pomp receive.

					 					For ’twas the morn: Apollo’s upward fire

					 					Made every eastern cloud a silvery pyre

					 					Of brightness so unsullied, that therein

					 					A melancholy spirit well might win

					 					Oblivion, and melt out his essence fine

					 					Into the winds: rain-scented eglantine

					 					Gave temperate sweets to that well-wooing sun;

					 					The lark was lost in him; cold springs had run

					 					To warm their chilliest bubbles in the grass;

					 					Man’s voice was on the mountains; and the mass

					 					Of nature’s lives and wonders pulsed tenfold,

					 					To feel this sun-rise and its glories old.



				 					Now while the silent workings of the dawn

					 					Were busiest, into that self-same lawn

					 					All suddenly, with joyful cries, there sped

					 					A troop of little children garlanded;

					 					Who gathering round the altar seem’d to pry

					 					Earnestly round as wishing to espy

					 					Some folk of holiday: nor had they waited

					 					For many moments, ere their ears were sated

					 					With a faint breath of music, which ev’n then

					 					Fill’d out its voice, and died away again.

					 					Within a little space again it gave

					 					Its airy swellings, with a gentle wave,

					 					To light-hung leaves, in smoothest echoes breaking

					 					Through copse-clad valleys,⁠—ere their death, o’er-taking

					 					The surgy murmurs of the lonely sea.



				 					And now, as deep into the wood as we

					 					Might mark a lynx’s eye, there glimmer’d light

					 					Fair faces and a rush of garments white,

					 					Plainer and plainer showing, till at last

					 					Into the widest alley they all past,

					 					Making directly for the woodland altar.

					 					O kindly muse! let not my weak tongue faulter

					 					In telling of this goodly company,

					 					Of their old piety, and of their glee:

					 					But let a portion of ethereal dew

					 					Fall on my head, and presently unmew

					 					My soul; that I may dare, in wayfaring,

					 					To stammer where old Chaucer used to sing.



				 					Leading the way, young damsels danced along,

					 					Bearing the burden of a shepherd song;

					 					Each having a white wicker, overbrimm’d

					 					With April’s tender younglings: next, well trimm’d,

					 					A crowd of shepherds with as sunburnt looks

					 					As may be read of in Arcadian books;

					 					Such as sat listening round Apollo’s pipe,

					 					When the great deity, for earth too ripe,

					 					Let his divinity o’erflowing die

					 					In music, through the vales of Thessaly:

					 					Some idly trail’d their sheep-hooks on the ground,

					 					And some kept up a shrilly mellow sound

					 					With ebon-tipped flutes: close after these,

					 					Now coming from beneath the forest trees,

					 					A venerable priest full soberly,

					 					Begirt with minist’ring looks: alway his eye

					 					Steadfast upon the matted turf he kept,

					 					And after him his sacred vestments swept.

					 					From his right hand there swung a vase, milk-white,

					 					Of mingled wine, out-sparkling generous light;

					 					And in his left he held a basket full

					 					Of all sweet herbs that searching eye could cull:

					 					Wild thyme, and valley-lilies whiter still

					 					Than Leda’s love, and cresses from the rill.

					 					His aged head, crowned with beechen wreath,

					 					Seem’d like a poll of ivy in the teeth

					 					Of winter hoar. Then came another crowd

					 					Of shepherds, lifting in due time aloud

					 					Their share of the ditty. After them appear’d,

					 					Up-follow’d by a multitude that rear’d

					 					Their voices to the clouds, a fair-wrought car,

					 					Easily rolling so as scarce to mar

					 					The freedom of three steeds of dapple brown:

					 					Who stood therein did seem of great renown

					 					Among the throng. His youth was fully blown,

					 					Showing like Ganymede to manhood grown;

					 					And, for those simple times, his garments were

					 					A chieftain king’s; beneath his breast, half bare,

					 					Was hung a silver bugle, and between

					 					His nervy knees there lay a boar-spear keen.

					 					A smile was on his countenance; he seem’d

					 					To common lookers-on, like one who dream’d

					 					Of idleness in groves Elysian:

					 					But there were some who feelingly could scan

					 					A lurking trouble in his nether lip,

					 					And see that oftentimes the reins would slip

					 					Through his forgotten hands: then would they sigh,

					 					And think of yellow leaves, of owlets’ cry,

					 					Of logs piled solemnly.⁠—Ah, well-a-day,

					 					Why should our young Endymion pine away!



				 					Soon the assembly, in a circle ranged,

					 					Stood silent round the shrine: each look was changed

					 					To sudden veneration: women meek

					 					Beckon’d their sons to silence; while each cheek

					 					Of virgin bloom paled gently for slight fear.

					 					Endymion too, without a forest peer,

					 					Stood, wan, and pale, and with an awed face,

					 					Among his brothers of the mountain chase.

					 					In midst of all, the venerable priest

					 					Eyed them with joy from greatest to the least,

					 					And, after lifting up his aged hands,

					 					Thus spake he: “Men of Latmos! shepherd bands!

					 					Whose care it is to guard a thousand flocks:

					 					Whether descended from beneath the rocks

					 					That overtop your mountains; whether come

					 					From valleys where the pipe is never dumb;

					 					Or from your swelling downs, where sweet air stirs

					 					Blue harebells lightly, and where prickly furze

					 					Buds lavish gold; or ye, whose precious charge

					 					Nibble their fill at ocean’s very marge,

					 					Whose mellow reeds are touch’d with sounds forlorn

					 					By the dim echoes of old Triton’s horn:

					 					Mothers and wives! who day by day prepare

					 					The scrip, with needments, for the mountain air;

					 					And all ye gentle girls who foster up

					 					Udderless lambs, and in a little cup

					 					Will put choice honey for a favour’d youth:

					 					Yea, every one attend! for in good truth

					 					Our vows are wanting to our great god Pan.

					 					Are not our lowing heifers sleeker than

					 					Night-swollen mushrooms? Are not our wide plains

					 					Speckled with countless fleeces? Have not rains

					 					Green’d over April’s lap? No howling sad

					 					Sickens our fearful ewes; and we have had

					 					Great bounty from Endymion our lord.

					 					The earth is glad: the merry lark has pour’d

					 					His early song against yon breezy sky,

					 					That spreads so clear o’er our solemnity.”



				 					Thus ending, on the shrine he heap’d a spire

					 					Of teeming sweets, enkindling sacred fire;

					 					Anon he stain’d the thick and spongy sod

					 					With wine, in honour of the shepherd-god.

					 					Now while the earth was drinking it, and while

					 					Bay leaves were crackling in the fragrant pile,

					 					And gummy frankincense was sparkling bright

					 					’Neath smothering parsley, and a hazy light

					 					Spread grayly eastward, thus a chorus sang:



				 					“O thou, whose mighty palace roof doth hang

					 					From jagged trunks, and overshadoweth

					 					Eternal whispers, glooms, the birth, life, death,

					 					Of unseen flowers in heavy peacefulness;

					 					Who lov’st to see the hamadryads dress

					 					Their ruffled locks where meeting hazels darken;

					 					And through whole solemn hours dost sit, and hearken

					 					The dreary melody of bedded reeds⁠—

					 					In desolate places, where dank moisture breeds

					 					The pipy hemlock to strange overgrowth;

					 					Bethinking thee, how melancholy loth

					 					Thou wast to lose fair Syrinx⁠—do thou now,

					 					By thy love’s milky brow!

					 					By all the trembling mazes that she ran,

					 					Hear us, great Pan!



				 					“O thou, for whose soul-soothing quiet, turtles

					 					Passion their voices cooingly ’mong myrtles,

					 					What time thou wanderest at eventide

					 					Through sunny meadows, that outskirt the side

					 					Of thine enmossed realms: O thou, to whom

					 					Broad-leaved fig-trees even now foredoom

					 					Their ripen’d fruitage; yellow-girted bees

					 					Their golden honeycombs; our village leas

					 					Their fairest blossom’d beans and poppied corn;

					 					The chuckling linnet its five young unborn,

					 					To sing for thee; low-creeping strawberries

					 					Their summer coolness; pent-up butterflies

					 					Their freckled wings; yea, the fresh budding year

					 					All its completions⁠—be quickly near,

					 					By every wind that nods the mountain pine,

					 					O forester divine!



				 					“Thou, to whom every faun and satyr flies

					 					For willing service; whether to surprise

					 					The squatted hare while in half-sleeping fit;

					 					Or upward ragged precipices flit

					 					To save poor lambkins from the eagle’s maw;

					 					Or by mysterious enticement draw

					 					Bewilder’d shepherds to their path again;

					 					Or to tread breathless round the frothy main,

					 					And gather up all fancifullest shells

					 					For thee to tumble into Naiads’ cells,

					 					And, being hidden, laugh at their out-peeping;

					 					Or to delight thee with fantastic leaping,

					 					The while they pelt each other on the crown

					 					With silvery oak-apples, and fir-cones brown⁠—

					 					By all the echoes that about thee ring,

					 					Hear us, O satyr king!



				 					“O Hearkener to the loud-clapping shears,

					 					While ever and anon to his shorn peers

					 					A ram goes bleating: Winder of the horn,

					 					When snouted wild-boars routing tender corn

					 					Anger our huntsman: Breather round our farms,

					 					To keep off mildews, and all weather harms:

					 					Strange ministrant of undescribed sounds,

					 					That come a-swooning over hollow grounds,

					 					And wither drearily on barren moors:

					 					Dread opener of the mysterious doors

					 					Leading to universal knowledge⁠—see,

					 					Great son of Dryope,

					 					The many that are come to pay their vows

					 					With leaves about their brows!



				 					“Be still the unimaginable lodge

					 					For solitary thinkings; such as dodge

					 					Conception to the very bourne of heaven,

					 					Then leave the naked brain: be still the leaven,

					 					That spreading in this dull and clodded earth

					 					Gives it a touch ethereal⁠—a new birth:

					 					Be still a symbol of immensity;

					 					A firmament reflected in a sea;

					 					An element filling the space between;

					 					An unknown⁠—but no more: we humbly screen

					 					With uplift hands our foreheads, lowly bending,

					 					And giving out a shout most heaven-rending,

					 					Conjure thee to receive our humble Pæan,

					 					Upon thy Mount Lycean!”



				 					Even while they brought the burden to a close,

					 					A shout from the whole multitude arose,

					 					That linger’d in the air like dying rolls

					 					Of abrupt thunder, when Ionian shoals

					 					Of dolphins bob their noses through the brine.

					 					Meantime, on shady levels, mossy fine,

					 					Young companies nimbly began dancing

					 					To the swift treble pipe, and humming string.

					 					Aye, those fair living forms swam heavenly

					 					To tunes forgotten⁠—out of memory:

					 					Fair creatures! whose young children’s children bred

					 					Thermopylæ its heroes⁠—not yet dead,

					 					But in old marbles ever beautiful.

					 					High genitors, unconscious did they cull

					 					Time’s sweet first-fruits⁠—they danced to weariness,

					 					And then in quiet circles did they press

					 					The hillock turf, and caught the latter end

					 					Of some strange history, potent to send

					 					A young mind from its bodily tenement.

					 					Or they might watch the quoit-pitchers, intent

					 					On either side; pitying the sad death

					 					Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath

					 					Of Zephyr slew him,⁠—Zephyr penitent,

					 					Who now, ere Phœbus mounts the firmament,

					 					Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain.

					 					The archers too, upon a wider plain,

					 					Beside the feathery whizzing of the shaft,

					 					And the dull twanging bowstring, and the raft

					 					Branch down sweeping from a tall ash top

					 					Call’d up a thousand thoughts to envelope

					 					Those who would watch. Perhaps, the trembling knee

					 					And frantic gape of lonely Niobe,

					 					Poor, lonely Niobe! when her lovely young

					 					Were dead and gone, and her caressing tongue

					 					Lay a lost thing upon her paly lip,

					 					And very, very deadliness did nip

					 					Her motherly cheeks. Aroused from this sad mood

					 					By one, who at a distance loud halloo’d,

					 					Uplifting his strong bow into the air,

					 					Many might after brighter visions stare:

					 					After the Argonauts, in blind amaze

					 					Tossing about on Neptune’s restless ways,

					 					Until, from the horizon’s vaulted side,

					 					There shot a golden splendour far and wide,

					 					Spangling those million poutings of the brine

					 					With quivering ore: ’twas even an awful shine

					 					From the exaltation of Apollo’s bow;

					 					A heavenly beacon in their dreary woe.

					 					Who thus were ripe for high contemplating,

					 					Might turn their steps towards the sober ring

					 					Where sat Endymion and the aged priest

					 					’Mong shepherds gone in eld, whose looks increased

					 					The silvery setting of their mortal star.

					 					There they discoursed upon the fragile bar

					 					That keeps us from our homes ethereal;

					 					And what our duties there: to nightly call

					 					Vesper, the beauty-crest of summer weather;

					 					To summon all the downiest clouds together

					 					For the sun’s purple couch; to emulate

					 					In minist’ring the potent rule of fate

					 					With speed of fire-tail’d exhalations;

					 					To tint her pallid cheek with bloom, who cons

					 					Sweet poesy by moonlight: besides these,

					 					A world of other unguess’d offices.

					 					Anon they wander’d, by divine converse,

					 					Into Elysium; vying to rehearse

					 					Each one his own anticipated bliss.

					 					One felt heart-certain that he could not miss

					 					His quick-gone love, among fair blossom’d boughs,

					 					Where every zephyr-sigh pouts, and endows

					 					Her lips with music for the welcoming.

					 					Another wish’d, ’mid that eternal spring,

					 					To meet his rosy child, with feathery sails,

					 					Sweeping, eye-earnestly, through almond vales:

					 					Who, suddenly, should stoop through the smooth wind,

					 					And with the balmiest leaves his temples bind;

					 					And, ever after, through those regions be

					 					His messenger, his little Mercury.

					 					Some were athirst in soul to see again

					 					Their fellow-huntsmen o’er the wide champaign

					 					In times long past; to sit with them, and talk

					 					Of all the chances in their earthly walk;

					 					Comparing, joyfully, their plenteous stores

					 					Of happiness, to when upon the moors,

					 					Benighted, close they huddled from the cold,

					 					And shared their famish’d scrips. Thus all out-told

					 					Their fond imaginations,⁠—saving him

					 					Whose eyelids curtain’d up their jewels dim,

					 					Endymion: yet hourly had he striven

					 					To hide the cankering venom, that had riven

					 					His fainting recollections. Now indeed

					 					His senses had swoon’d off: he did not heed

					 					The sudden silence, or the whispers low,

					 					Or the old eyes dissolving at his woe,

					 					Or anxious calls, or close of trembling palms,

					 					Or maiden’s sigh, that grief itself embalms:

					 					But in the self-same fixed trance he kept,

					 					Like one who on the earth had never stept.

					 					Aye, even as dead-still as a marble man,

					 					Frozen in that old tale Arabian.



				 					Who whispers him so pantingly and close?

					 					Peona, his sweet sister: of all those,

					 					His friends, the dearest. Hushing signs she made,

					 					And breathed a sister’s sorrow to persuade

					 					A yielding up, a cradling on her care.

					 					Her eloquence did breathe away the curse:

					 					She led him, like some midnight spirit nurse

					 					Of happy changes in emphatic dreams,

					 					Along a path between two little streams,⁠—

					 					Guarding his forehead, with her round elbow,

					 					From low-grown branches, and his footsteps slow

					 					From stumbling over stumps and hillocks small;

					 					Until they came to where these streamlets fall,

					 					With mingled bubblings and a gentle rush,

					 					Into a river, clear, brimful, and flush

					 					With crystal mocking of the trees and sky.

					 					A little shallop, floating there hard by,

					 					Pointed its beak over the fringed bank;

					 					And soon it lightly dipt, and rose, and sank,

					 					And dipt again, with the young couple’s weight,⁠—

					 					Peona guiding, through the water straight,

					 					Towards a bowery island opposite;

					 					Which gaining presently, she steered light

					 					Into a shady, fresh, and ripply cove,

					 					Where nested was an arbour, overwove

					 					By many a summer’s silent fingering;

					 					To whose cool bosom she was used to bring

					 					Her playmates, with their needle broidery,

					 					And minstrel memories of times gone by.



				 					So she was gently glad to see him laid

					 					Under her favourite bower’s quiet shade

					 					On her own couch, new made of flower leaves,

					 					Dried carefully on the cooler side of sheaves

					 					When last the sun his autumn tresses shook,

					 					And the tann’d harvesters rich armfuls took.

					 					Soon was he quieted to slumbrous rest:

					 					But, ere it crept upon him, he had prest

					 					Peona’s busy hand against his lips,

					 					And still, a-sleeping, held her finger-tips

					 					In tender pressure. And as a willow keeps

					 					A patient watch over the stream that creeps

					 					Windingly by it, so the quiet maid

					 					Held her in peace: so that a whispering blade

					 					Of grass, a wailful gnat, a bee bustling

					 					Down in the bluebells, or a wren light rustling

					 					Among sere leaves and twigs, might all be heard.



				 					O magic sleep! O comfortable bird,

					 					That broodest o’er the troubled sea of the mind

					 					Till it is hush’d and smooth! O unconfined

					 					Restraint! imprison’d liberty! great key

					 					To golden palaces, strange minstrelsy,

					 					Fountains grotesque, new trees, bespangled caves,

					 					Echoing grottoes, full of tumbling waves

					 					And moonlight; aye, to all the mazy world

					 					Of silvery enchantment!⁠—who, upfurl’d

					 					Beneath thy drowsy wing a triple hour,

					 					But renovates and lives?⁠—Thus, in the bower,

					 					Endymion was calm’d to life again.

					 					Opening his eyelids with a healthier brain,

					 					He said: “I feel this thine endearing love

					 					All through my bosom: thou art as a dove

					 					Trembling its closed eyes and sleeked wings

					 					About me; and the pearliest dew not brings

					 					Such morning incense from the fields of May,

					 					As do those brighter drops that twinkling stray

					 					From those kind eyes,⁠—the very home and haunt

					 					Of sisterly affection. Can I want

					 					Aught else, aught nearer heaven, than such tears?

					 					Yet dry them up, in bidding hence all fears

					 					That, any longer, I will pass my days

					 					Alone and sad. No, I will once more raise

					 					My voice upon the mountain-heights; once more

					 					Make my horn parley from their foreheads hoar:

					 					Again my trooping hounds their tongues shall loll

					 					Around the breathed boar: again I’ll poll

					 					The fair-grown yew-tree, for a chosen bow:

					 					And, when the pleasant sun is getting low,

					 					Again I’ll linger in a sloping mead

					 					To hear the speckled thrushes, and see feed

					 					Our idle sheep. So be thou cheered, sweet!

					 					And, if thy lute is here, softly intreat

					 					My soul to keep in its resolved course.”



				 					Hereat Peona, in their silver source,

					 					Shut her pure sorrow-drops with glad exclaim,

					 					And took a lute, from which there pulsing came

					 					A lively prelude, fashioning the way

					 					In which her voice should wander. ’Twas a lay

					 					More subtle cadenced, more forest wild

					 					Than Dryope’s lone lulling of her child;

					 					And nothing since has floated in the air

					 					So mournful strange. Surely some influence rare

					 					Went, spiritual, through the damsel’s hand;

					 					For still, with Delphic emphasis, she spann’d

					 					The quick invisible strings, even though she saw

					 					Endymion’s spirit melt away and thaw

					 					Before the deep intoxication.

					 					But soon she came, with sudden burst, upon

					 					Her self-possession⁠—swung the lute aside,

					 					And earnestly said: “Brother, ’tis vain to hide

					 					That thou dost know of things mysterious,

					 					Immortal, starry; such alone could thus

					 					Weigh down thy nature. Hast thou sinn’d in aught

					 					Offensive to the heavenly powers? Caught

					 					A Paphian dove upon a message sent?

					 					Thy deathful bow against some deer-herd bent,

					 					Sacred to Dian? Haply, thou hast seen

					 					Her naked limbs among the alders green;

					 					And that, alas! is death! No, I can trace

					 					Something more high perplexing in thy face!”



				 					Endymion look’d at her, and press’d her hand,

					 					And said, “Art thou so pale, who wast so bland

					 					And merry in our meadows? How is this?

					 					Tell me thine ailment: tell me all amiss!⁠—

					 					Ah! thou hast been unhappy at the change

					 					Wrought suddenly in me. What indeed more strange?

					 					Or more complete to overwhelm surmise?

					 					Ambition is no sluggard: ’tis no prize,

					 					That toiling years would put within my grasp,

					 					That I have sigh’d for: with so deadly gasp

					 					No man e’er panted for a mortal love.

					 					So all have set my heavier grief above

					 					These things which happen. Rightly have they done:

					 					I, who still saw the horizontal sun

					 					Heave his broad shoulder o’er the edge of the world,

					 					Out-facing Lucifer, and then had hurl’d

					 					My spear aloft, as signal for the chase⁠—

					 					I, who, for very sport of heart, would race

					 					With my own steed from Araby; pluck down

					 					A vulture from his towery perching; frown

					 					A lion into growling, loth retire⁠—

					 					To lose, at once, all my toil-breeding fire,

					 					And sink thus low! but I will ease my breast

					 					Of secret grief, here in this bowery nest.



				 					“This river does not see the naked sky,

					 					Till it begins to progress silverly

					 					Around the western border of the wood,

					 					Whence, from a certain spot, its winding flood

					 					Seems at the distance like a crescent moon:

					 					And in that nook, the very pride of June,

					 					Had I been used to pass my weary eves;

					 					The rather for the sun unwilling leaves

					 					So dear a picture of his sovereign power,

					 					And I could witness his most kingly hour,

					 					When he doth tighten up the golden reins,

					 					And paces leisurely down amber plains

					 					His snorting four. Now when his chariot last

					 					Its beams against the zodiac-lion cast,

					 					There blossom’d suddenly a magic bed

					 					Of sacred ditamy, and poppies red:

					 					At which I wondered greatly, knowing well

					 					That but one night had wrought this flowery spell;

					 					And, sitting down close by, began to muse

					 					What it might mean. Perhaps, thought I, Morpheus,

					 					In passing here, his owlet pinions shook;

					 					Or, it may be, ere matron Night uptook

					 					Her ebon urn, young Mercury, by stealth,

					 					Had dipt his rod in it: such garland wealth

					 					Came not by common growth. Thus on I thought,

					 					Until my head was dizzy and distraught.

					 					Moreover, through the dancing poppies stole

					 					A breeze, most softly lulling to my soul;

					 					And shaping visions all about my sight

					 					Of colours, wings, and bursts of spangly light;

					 					The which became more strange, and strange, and dim,

					 					And then were gulf’d in a tumultuous swim:

					 					And then I fell asleep. Ah, can I tell

					 					The enchantment that afterwards befell?

					 					Yet it was but a dream: yet such a dream

					 					That never tongue, although it overteem

					 					With mellow utterance, like a cavern spring,

					 					Could figure out and to conception bring

					 					All I beheld and felt. Methought I lay

					 					Watching the zenith, where the milky way

					 					Among the stars in virgin splendour pours;

					 					And travelling my eye, until the doors

					 					Of heaven appear’d to open for my flight,

					 					I became loth and fearful to alight

					 					From such high soaring by a downward glance:

					 					So kept me steadfast in that airy trance,

					 					Spreading imaginary pinions wide.

					 					When, presently, the stars began to glide,

					 					And faint away, before my eager view:

					 					At which I sigh’d that I could not pursue,

					 					And dropt my vision to the horizon’s verge;

					 					And lo! from opening clouds, I saw emerge

					 					The loveliest moon, that ever silver’d o’er

					 					A shell for Neptune’s goblet; she did soar

					 					So passionately bright, my dazzled soul

					 					Commingling with her argent spheres did roll

					 					Through clear and cloudy, even when she went

					 					At last into a dark and vapoury tent⁠—

					 					Whereat, methought, the lidless-eyed train

					 					Of planets all were in the blue again.

					 					To commune with those orbs, once more I raised

					 					My sight right upward: but it was quite dazed

					 					By a bright something, sailing down apace,

					 					Making me quickly veil my eyes and face:

					 					Again I look’d, and, O ye deities,

					 					Who from Olympus watch our destinies!

					 					Whence that completed form of all completeness?

					 					Whence came that high perfection of all sweetness?

					 					Speak, stubborn earth, and tell me where, O where

					 					Hast thou a symbol of her golden hair?

					 					Not oat-sheaves drooping in the western sun;

					 					Not⁠—thy soft hand, fair sister! let me shun

					 					Such follying before thee⁠—yet she had,

					 					Indeed, locks bright enough to make me mad;

					 					And they were simply gordian’d up and braided,

					 					Leaving, in naked comeliness, unshaded,

					 					Her pearl round ears, white neck, and orbed brow;

					 					The which were blended in, I know not how,

					 					With such a paradise of lips and eyes,

					 					Blush-tinted cheeks, half-smiles, and faintest sighs,

					 					That, when I think thereon, my spirit clings

					 					And plays about its fancy, till the stings

					 					Of human neighbourhood envenom all.

					 					Unto what awful power shall I call?

					 					To what high fane?⁠—Ah! see her hovering feet,

					 					More bluely vein’d, more soft, more whitely sweet

					 					Than those of sea-born Venus, when she rose

					 					From out her cradle shell. The wind out-blows

					 					Her scarf into a fluttering pavilion;

					 					’Tis blue, and over-spangled with a million

					 					Of little eyes, as though thou wert to shed

					 					Over the darkest, lushest bluebell bed,

					 					Handfuls of daisies.”⁠—“Endymion, how strange!

					 					Dream within dream!”⁠—“She took an airy range,

					 					And then, towards me, like a very maid,

					 					Came blushing, waning, willing, and afraid,

					 					And press’d me by the hand: Ah! ’twas too much;

					 					Methought I fainted at the charmed touch,

					 					Yet held my recollection, even as one

					 					Who dives three fathoms where the waters run

					 					Gurgling in beds of coral: for anon,

					 					I felt upmounted in that region

					 					Where falling stars dart their artillery forth,

					 					And eagles struggle with the buffeting north

					 					That balances the heavy meteor-stone;⁠—

					 					Felt too, I was not fearful, nor alone,

					 					But lapp’d and lull’d along the dangerous sky.

					 					Soon, as it seem’d, we left our journeying high,

					 					And straightway into frightful eddies swoop’d;

					 					Such as ay muster where gray time has scoop’d

					 					Huge dens and caverns in a mountain’s side:

					 					There hollow sounds aroused me, and I sigh’d

					 					To faint once more by looking on my bliss⁠—

					 					I was distracted; madly did I kiss

					 					The wooing arms which held me, and did give

					 					My eyes at once to death: but ’twas to live,

					 					To take in draughts of life from the gold fount

					 					Of kind and passionate looks; to count, and count

					 					The moments, by some greedy help that seem’d

					 					A second self, that each might be redeem’d

					 					And plunder’d of its load of blessedness.

					 					Ah, desperate mortal! I ev’n dared to press

					 					Her very cheek against my crowned lip,

					 					And, at that moment, felt my body dip

					 					Into a warmer air: a moment more,

					 					Our feet were soft in flowers. There was store

					 					Of newest joys upon that alp. Sometimes

					 					A scent of violets, and blossoming limes,

					 					Loiter’d around us; then of honey cells,

					 					Made delicate from all white-flower bells;

					 					And once, above the edges of our nest,

					 					An arch face peep’d,⁠—an Oread as I guess’d.



				 					“Why did I dream that sleep o’erpower’d me

					 					In midst of all this heaven? Why not see,

					 					Far off, the shadows of his pinions dark,

					 					And stare them from me? But no, like a spark

					 					That needs must die, although its little beam

					 					Reflects upon a diamond, my sweet dream

					 					Fell into nothing⁠—into stupid sleep.

					 					And so it was, until a gentle creep,

					 					A careful moving caught my waking ears,

					 					And up I started: Ah! my sighs, my tears,

					 					My clenched hands;⁠—for lo! the poppies hung

					 					Dew-dabbled on their stalks, the ouzel sung

					 					A heavy ditty, and the sullen day

					 					Had chidden herald Hesperus away,

					 					With leaden looks: the solitary breeze

					 					Bluster’d, and slept, and its wild self did tease

					 					With wayward melancholy; and I thought,

					 					Mark me, Peona! that sometimes it brought

					 					Faint fare-thee-wells, and sigh-shrillcd adieus!⁠—

					 					Away I wander’d⁠—all the pleasant hues

					 					Of heaven and earth had faded: deepest shades

					 					Were deepest dungeons; heaths and sunny glades

					 					Were full of pestilent light; our taintless rills

					 					Seem’d sooty, and o’erspread with upturn’d gills

					 					Of dying fish; the vermeil rose had blown

					 					In frightful scarlet, and its thorns outgrown

					 					Like spiked aloe. If an innocent bird

					 					Before my heedless footsteps stirr’d, and stirr’d

					 					In little journeys, I beheld in it

					 					A disguised demon, missioned to knit

					 					My soul with under darkness; to entice

					 					My stumblings down some monstrous precipice:

					 					Therefore I eager follow’d, and did curse

					 					The disappointment. Time, that aged nurse,

					 					Rock’d me to patience. Now, thank gentle heaven!

					 					These things, with all their comfortings, are given

					 					To my down-sunken hours, and with thee,

					 					Sweet sister, help to stem the ebbing sea

					 					Of weary life.”



				 					Thus ended he, and both

					 					Sat silent: for the maid was very loth

					 					To answer; feeling well that breathed words

					 					Would all be lost, unheard, and vain as swords

					 					Against the enchased crocodile, or leaps

					 					Of grasshoppers against the sun. She weeps,

					 					And wonders; struggles to devise some blame;

					 					To put on such a look as would say, Shame

					 					On this poor weakness! but, for all her strife,

					 					She could as soon have crush’d away the life

					 					From a sick dove. At length, to break the pause,

					 					She said with trembling chance: “Is this the cause?

					 					This all? Yet it is strange, and sad, alas!

					 					That one who through this middle earth should pass

					 					Most like a sojourning demi-god, and leave

					 					His name upon the harp-string, should achieve

					 					No higher bard than simple maidenhood,

					 					Singing alone, and fearfully,⁠—how the blood

					 					Left his young cheek; and how he used to stray

					 					He knew not where; and how he would say, nay,

					 					If any said ’twas love: and yet ’twas love;

					 					What could it be but love? How a ringdove

					 					Let fall a sprig of yew-tree in his path;

					 					And how he died: and then, that love doth scathe

					 					The gentle heart, as northern blasts do roses;

					 					And then the ballad of his sad life closes

					 					With sighs, and an alas!⁠—Endymion!

					 					Be rather in the trumpet’s mouth,⁠—anon

					 					Among the winds at large⁠—that all may hearken!

					 					Although, before the crystal heavens darken,

					 					I watch and dote upon the silver lakes

					 					Pictured in western cloudiness, that takes

					 					The semblance of gold rocks and bright gold sands,

					 					Islands, and creeks, and amber-fretted strands

					 					With horses prancing o’er them, palaces

					 					And towers of amethyst,⁠—would I so tease

					 					My pleasant days, because I could not mount

					 					Into those regions? The Morphean fount

					 					Of that fine element that visions, dreams,

					 					And fitful whims of sleep are made of, streams

					 					Into its airy channels with so subtle,

					 					So thin a breathing, not the spider’s shuttle,

					 					Circled a million times within the space

					 					Of a swallow’s nest-door, could delay a trace,

					 					A tinting of its quality: how light

					 					Must dreams themselves be; seeing they’re more slight

					 					Than the mere nothing that engenders them!

					 					Then wherefore sully the entrusted gem

					 					Of high and noble life with thoughts so sick?

					 					Why pierce high-fronted honour to the quick

					 					For nothing but a dream?” Hereat the youth

					 					Look’d up: a conflicting of shame and ruth

					 					Was in his plaited brow: yet his eyelids

					 					Widen’d a little, as when Zephyr bids

					 					A little breeze to creep between the fans

					 					Of careless butterflies: amid his pains

					 					He seem’d to taste a drop of manna-dew,

					 					Full palatable; and a colour grew

					 					Upon his cheek, while thus he lifeful spake.



				 					“Peona! ever have I long’d to slake

					 					My thirst for the world’s praises: nothing base,

					 					No merely slumberous phantasm, could unlace

					 					The stubborn canvas for my voyage prepared⁠—

					 					Though now ’tis tatter’d; leaving my bark bared

					 					And sullenly drifting: yet my higher hope

					 					Is of too wide, too rainbow-large a scope,

					 					To fret at myriads of earthly wrecks.

					 					Wherein lies happiness? In that which becks

					 					Our ready minds to fellowship divine,

					 					A fellowship with essence; till we shine,

					 					Full alchemized, and free of space. Behold

					 					The clear religion of heaven! Fold

					 					A rose leaf round thy finger’s taperness,

					 					And soothe thy lips: hist, when the airy stress

					 					Of music’s kiss impregnates the free winds,

					 					And with a sympathetic touch unbinds

					 					Æolian magic from their lucid wombs:

					 					Then old songs waken from enclouded tombs;

					 					Old ditties sigh above their father’s grave;

					 					Ghosts of melodious prophesyings rave

					 					Round every spot where trod Apollo’s foot;

					 					Bronze clarions awake, and faintly bruit,

					 					Where long ago a giant battle was;

					 					And, from the turf, a lullaby doth pass

					 					In every place where infant Orpheus slept.

					 					Feel we these things?⁠—that moment have we stept

					 					Into a sort of oneness, and our state

					 					Is like a floating spirit’s. But there are

					 					Richer entanglements, enthralments far

					 					More self-destroying, leading, by degrees,

					 					To the chief intensity: the crown of these

					 					Is made of love and friendship, and sits high

					 					Upon the forehead of humanity.

					 					All its more ponderous and bulky worth

					 					Is friendship, whence there ever issues forth

					 					A steady splendour; but at the tip-top,

					 					There hangs by unseen film, an orbed drop

					 					Of light, and that is love: its influence

					 					Thrown in our eyes genders a novel sense,

					 					At which we start and fret: till in the end,

					 					Melting into its radiance, we blend,

					 					Mingle, and so become a part of it,⁠—

					 					Nor with aught else can our souls interknit

					 					So wingedly: when we combine therewith,

					 					Life’s self is nourish’d by its proper pith,

					 					And we are nurtured like a pelican brood.

					 					Aye, so delicious is the unsating food,

					 					That men, who might have tower’d in the van

					 					Of all the congregated world, to fan

					 					And winnow from the coming step of time

					 					All chaff of custom, wipe away all slime

					 					Left by men-slugs and human serpentry,

					 					Have been content to let occasion die,

					 					Whilst they did sleep in love’s Elysium.

					 					And, truly, I would rather be struck dumb,

					 					Than speak against this ardent listlessness:

					 					For I have ever thought that it might bless

					 					The world with benefits unknowingly;

					 					As does the nightingale, up-perched high,

					 					And cloister’d among cool and bunched leaves⁠—

					 					She sings but to her love, nor e’er conceives

					 					How tiptoe Night holds back her dark-gray hood.

					 					Just so may love, although ’tis understood

					 					The mere commingling of passionate breath,

					 					Produce more than our searching witnesseth:

					 					What I know not: but who, of men, can tell

					 					That flowers would bloom, or that green fruit would swell

					 					To melting pulp, that fish would have bright mail,

					 					The earth its dower of river, wood, and vale,

					 					The meadows runnels, runnels pebble-stones

					 					The seed its harvest, or the lute its tones,

					 					Tones ravishment, or ravishment its sweet,

					 					If human souls did never kiss and greet?



				 					“Now, if this earthly love has power to make

					 					Men’s being mortal, immortal; to shake

					 					Ambition from their memories, and brim

					 					Their measure of content; what merest whim,

					 					Seems all this poor endeavour after fame,

					 					To one, who keeps within his steadfast aim

					 					A love immortal, an immortal too.

					 					Look not so wilder’d; for these things are true

					 					And never can be born of atomies

					 					That buzz about our slumbers, like brain-flies,

					 					Leaving us fancy-sick. No, no, I’m sure,

					 					My restless spirit never could endure

					 					To brood so long upon one luxury,

					 					Unless it did, though fearfully, espy

					 					A hope beyond the shadow of a dream.

					 					My sayings will the less obscured seem

					 					When I have told thee how my waking sight

					 					Has made me scruple whether that same night

					 					Was pass’d in dreaming. Hearken, sweet Peona!

					 					Beyond the matron-temple of Latona,

					 					Which we should see but for these darkening boughs,

					 					Lies a deep hollow, from whose ragged brows

					 					Bushes and trees do lean all round athwart,

					 					And meet so nearly, that with wings outraught,

					 					And spreaded tail, a vulture could not glide

					 					Past them, but he must brush on every side.

					 					Some moulder’d steps lead into this cool cell,

					 					Far as the slabbed margin of a well,

					 					Whose patient level peeps its crystal eye

					 					Right upward, through the bushes, to the sky.

					 					Oft have I brought thee flowers, on their stalks set

					 					Like vestal primroses, but dark velvet

					 					Edges them round, and they have golden pits:

					 					’Twas there I got them, from the gaps and slits

					 					In a mossy stone, that sometimes was my seat,

					 					When all above was faint with mid-day heat.

					 					And there in strife no burning thoughts to heed,

					 					I’d bubble up the water through a reed;

					 					So reaching back to boyhood: make me ships

					 					Of moulted feathers, touchwood, alder chips,

					 					With leaves stuck in them; and the Neptune be

					 					Of their petty ocean. Oftener, heavily,

					 					When lovelorn hours had left me less a child,

					 					I sat contemplating the figures wild

					 					Of o’erhead clouds melting the mirror through.

					 					Upon a day, while thus I watch’d, by flew

					 					A cloudy Cupid, with his bow and quiver;

					 					So plainly character’d, no breeze would shiver

					 					The happy chance: so happy, I was fain

					 					To follow it upon the open plain,

					 					And, therefore, was just going; when, behold!

					 					A wonder, fair as any I have told⁠—

					 					The same bright face I tasted in my sleep,

					 					Smiling in the clear well. My heart did leap

					 					Through the cool depth.⁠—It moved as if to flee⁠—

					 					I started up, when lo! refreshfully,

					 					There came upon my face, in plenteous showers,

					 					Dew-drops, and dewy buds, and leaves, and flowers,

					 					Wrapping all objects from my smother’d sight,

					 					Bathing my spirit in a new delight.

					 					Aye, such a breathless honey-feel of bliss

					 					Alone preserved me from the drear abyss

					 					Of death, for the fair form had gone again.

					 					Pleasure is oft a visitant; but pain

					 					Clings cruelly to us, like the gnawing sloth

					 					On the deer’s tender haunches: late, and loth,

					 					’Tis scared away by slow returning pleasure.

					 					How sickening, how dark the dreadful leisure

					 					Of weary days, made deeper exquisite,

					 					By a foreknowledge of unslumbrous night!

					 					Like sorrow came upon me, heavier still,

					 					Than when I wander’d from the poppy hill:

					 					And a whole age of lingering moments crept

					 					Sluggishly by, ere more contentment swept

					 					Away at once the deadly yellow spleen.

					 					Yes, thrice have I this fair enchantment seen;

					 					Once more been tortured with renewed life.

					 					When last the wintry gusts gave over strife

					 					With the conquering sun of spring, and left the skies

					 					Warm and serene, but yet with moisten’d eyes

					 					In pity of the shatter’d infant buds,⁠—

					 					That time thou didst adorn, with amber studs,

					 					My hunting cap, because I laugh’d and smiled,

					 					Chatted with thee, and many days exiled

					 					All torment from my breast;⁠—’twas even then,

					 					Straying about, yet coop’d up in the den

					 					Of helpless discontent,⁠—hurling my lance

					 					From place to place, and following at chance,

					 					At last, by hap, through some young trees it struck,

					 					And, plashing among bedded pebbles, stuck

					 					In the middle of a brook,⁠—whose silver ramble

					 					Down twenty little falls through reeds and bramble,

					 					Tracing along, it brought me to a cave,

					 					Whence it ran brightly forth, and white did lave

					 					The nether sides of mossy stones and rock,⁠—

					 					’Mong which it gurgled blithe adieus, to mock

					 					Its own sweet grief at parting. Overhead,

					 					Hung a lush screen of drooping weeds, and spread

					 					Thick, as to curtain up some wood-nymph’s home.

					 					‘Ah! impious mortal, whither do I roam!’

					 					Said I, low-voiced: ‘Ah, whither! ’Tis the grot

					 					Of Proserpine, when Hell, obscure and hot,

					 					Doth her resign; and where her tender hands

					 					She dabbles, on the cool and sluicy sands:

					 					Or ’tis the cell of Echo, where she sits,

					 					And babbles thorough silence, till her wits

					 					Are gone in tender madness, and anon,

					 					Faints into sleep, with many a dying tone

					 					Of sadness. O that she would take my vows,

					 					And breathe them sighingly among the boughs,

					 					To sue her gentle ears for whose fair head,

					 					Daily, I pluck sweet flowerets from their bed,

					 					And weave them dyingly⁠—send honey-whispers

					 					Round every leaf, that all those gentle lispers

					 					May sigh my love unto her pitying!

					 					O charitable Echo! hear, and sing

					 					This ditty to her!⁠—tell her’⁠—So I stay’d

					 					My foolish tongue, and listening, half afraid,

					 					Stood stupefied with my own empty folly,

					 					And blushing for the freaks of melancholy.

					 					Salt tears were coming, when I heard my name

					 					Most fondly lipp’d, and then these accents came:

					 					‘Endymion! the cave is secreter

					 					Than the isle of Delos. Echo hence shall stir

					 					No sighs but sigh-warm kisses, or light noise

					 					Of thy combing hand, the while it travelling cloys

					 					And trembles through my labyrinthine hair.’

					 					At that oppress’d, I hurried in.⁠—Ah! where

					 					Are those swift moments? Whither are they fled?

					 					I’ll smile no more, Peona; nor will wed

					 					Sorrow, the way to death; but patiently

					 					Bear up against it: so farewell, sad sigh;

					 					And come instead demurest meditation,

					 					To occupy me wholly, and to fashion

					 					My pilgrimage for the world’s dusky brink,

					 					No more will I count over, link by link,

					 					My chain of grief: no longer strive to find

					 					A half-forgetfulness in mountain wind

					 					Blustering about my ears: aye, thou shalt see,

					 					Dearest of sisters, what my life shall be;

					 					What a calm round of hours shall make my days.

					 					There is a paly flame of hope that plays

					 					Where’er I look; but yet, I’ll say ’tis naught⁠—

					 					And here I bid it die. Have not I caught,

					 					Already, a more healthy countenance?

					 					By this the sun is setting; we may chance

					 					Meet some of our near-dwellers with my car.”



				 					This said, he rose, faint-smiling like a star

					 					Through autumn mists, and took Peona’s hand:

					 					They stept into the boat, and launch’d from land.





II


				 					O sovereign power of love! O grief! O balm!

					 					All records, saving thine, come cool, and calm,

					 					And shadowy, through the mist of passed years:

					 					For others, good or bad, hatred and tears

					 					Have become indolent; but touching thine,

					 					One sigh doth echo, one poor sob doth pine,

					 					One kiss brings honey-dew from buried days.

					 					The woes of Troy, towers smothering o’er their blaze,

					 					Stiff-holden shields, far-piercing spears, keen blades,

					 					Struggling, and blood, and shrieks⁠—all dimly fades

					 					Into some backward corner of the brain;

					 					Yet, in our very souls, we feel amain

					 					The close of Troïlus and Cressid sweet.

					 					Hence, pageant history! hence, gilded cheat!

					 					Swart planet in the universe of deeds!

					 					Wide sea, that one continuous murmur breeds

					 					Along the pebbled shore of memory!

					 					Many old rotten-timber’d boats there be

					 					Upon thy vaporous bosom, magnified

					 					To goodly vessels; many a sail of pride,

					 					And golden-keel’d, is left unlaunch’d and dry.

					 					But wherefore this? What care, though owl did fly

					 					About the great Athenian admiral’s mast?

					 					What care, though striding Alexander past

					 					The Indus with his Macedonian numbers?

					 					Though old Ulysses tortured from his slumbers

					 					The glutted Cyclops, what care?⁠—Juliet leaning

					 					Amid her window-flowers,⁠—sighing,⁠—weaning

					 					Tenderly her fancy from its maiden snow,

					 					Doth more avail than these; the silver flow

					 					Of Hero’s tears, the swoon of Imogen,

					 					Fair Pastorella in the bandit’s den,

					 					Are things to brood on with more ardency

					 					Than the death-day of empires. Fearfully

					 					Must such conviction come upon his head,

					 					Who, thus far, discontent, has dared to tread,

					 					Without one muse’s smile, or kind behest,

					 					The path of love and poesy. But rest,

					 					In chafing restlessness, is yet more drear

					 					Than to be crush’d, in striving to uprear

					 					Love’s standard on the battlements of song.

					 					So once more days and nights aid me along,

					 					Like legion’d soldiers.



				 					Brain-sick shepherd-prince,

					 					What promise hast thou faithful guarded since

					 					The day of sacrifice? Or, have new sorrows

					 					Come with the constant dawn upon thy morrows?

					 					Alas! ’tis his old grief. For many days,

					 					Has he been wandering in uncertain ways:

					 					Through wilderness, and woods of mossed oaks;

					 					Counting his woe-worn minutes, by the strokes

					 					Of the lone wood-cutter; and listening still,

					 					Hour after hour, to each lush-leaved rill.

					 					Now he is sitting by a shady spring,

					 					And elbow-deep with feverous fingering

					 					Stems the upbursting cold: a wild rose tree

					 					Pavilions him in bloom, and he doth see

					 					A bud which snares his fancy: lo! but now

					 					He plucks it, dips its stalk in the water: how!

					 					It swells, it buds, it flowers beneath his sight;

					 					And, in the middle, there is softly pight

					 					A golden butterfly; upon whose wings

					 					There must be surely character’d strange things,

					 					For with wide eye he wonders, and smiles oft.



				 					Lightly this little herald flew aloft,

					 					Follow’d by glad Endymion’s clasped hands:

					 					Onward it flies. From languor’s sullen bands

					 					His limbs are loosed, and eager, on he hies

					 					Dazzled to trace it in the sunny skies.

					 					It seem’d lie flew, the way so easy was;

					 					And like a new-born spirit did he pass

					 					Through the green evening quiet in the sun,

					 					O’er many a heath, through many a woodland dun,

					 					Through buried paths, where sleepy twilight dreams

					 					The summer time away. One track unseams

					 					A wooded cleft, and, far away, the blue

					 					Of ocean fades upon him; then, anew,

					 					He sinks adown a solitary glen,

					 					Where there was never sound of mortal men,

					 					Saving, perhaps, some snow-light cadences

					 					Melting to silence, when upon the breeze

					 					Some holy bark let forth an anthem sweet,

					 					To cheer itself to Delphi. Still his feet

					 					Went swift beneath the merry-winged guide,

					 					Until it reach’d a splashing fountain’s side

					 					That, near a cavern’s mouth, for ever pour’d

					 					Unto the temperate air: then high it soar’d,

					 					And, downward, suddenly began to dip,

					 					As if, athirst with so much toil, ’twould sip

					 					The crystal spout-head: so it did, with touch

					 					Most delicate, as though afraid to smutch,

					 					Even with mealy gold, the waters clear.

					 					But, at that very touch, to disappear

					 					So fairy-quick, was strange! Bewildered,

					 					Endymion sought around, and shook each bed

					 					Of covert flowers in vain; and then he flung

					 					Himself along the grass. What gentle tongue,

					 					What whisperer, disturb’d his gloomy rest?

					 					It was a nymph uprisen to the breast

					 					In the fountain’s pebbly margin, and she stood

					 					’Mong lilies, like the youngest of the brood.

					 					To him her dripping hand she softly kist,

					 					And anxiously began to plait and twist

					 					Her ringlets round her fingers, saying: “Youth!

					 					Too long, alas, hast thou starved on the ruth,

					 					The bitterness of love: too long indeed,

					 					Seeing thou art so gentle. Could I weed

					 					The soul of care, by heavens, I would offer

					 					All the bright riches of my crystal coffer,

					 					To Amphitrite; all my clear-eyed fish,

					 					Golden, or rainbow-sided, or purplish,

					 					Vermilion-tail’d, or finn’d with silvery gauze;

					 					Yea, or my veined pebble-floor, that draws

					 					A virgin light to the deep; my grotto-sands,

					 					Tawny and gold, oozed slowly from far lands

					 					By my diligent springs: my level lilies, shells,

					 					My charming rod, my potent river spells;

					 					Yes, every thing, even to the pearly cup

					 					Meander gave me,⁠—for I bubbled up

					 					To fainting creatures in a desert wild.

					 					But woe is me, I am but as a child

					 					To gladden thee; and all I dare to say,

					 					Is, that I pity thee; that on this day

					 					I’ve been thy guide; that thou must wander far

					 					In other regions, past the scanty bar

					 					To mortal steps, before thou canst be ta’en

					 					From every wasting sigh, from every pain,

					 					Into the gentle bosom of thy love.

					 					Why it is thus, one knows in heaven above:

					 					But, a poor Naiad, I guess not. Farewell!

					 					I have a ditty for my hollow cell.”



				 					Hereat she vanish’d from Endymion’s gaze,

					 					Who brooded o’er the water in amaze:

					 					The dashing fount pour’d on, and where its pool

					 					Lay, half asleep, in grass and rushes cool,

					 					Quick waterflies and gnats were sporting still,

					 					And fish were dimpling, as if good nor ill

					 					Had fallen out that hour. The wanderer,

					 					Holding his forehead to keep off the burr

					 					Of smothering fancies, patiently sat down;

					 					And, while beneath the evening’s sleepy frown

					 					Glowworms began to trim their starry lamps,

					 					Thus breathed he to himself: “Whoso encamps

					 					To take a fancied city of delight,

					 					O what a wretch is he! and when ’tis his,

					 					After long toil and travelling, to miss

					 					The kernel of his hopes, how more than vile:

					 					Yet, for him there’s refreshment even in toil:

					 					Another city doth he set about,

					 					Free from the smallest pebble-bead of doubt

					 					That he will seize on trickling honey-combs:

					 					Alas, he finds them dry; and then he foams,

					 					And onward to another city speeds.

					 					But this is human life: the war, the deeds,

					 					The disappointment, the anxiety,

					 					Imagination’s struggles, far and nigh,

					 					All human; bearing in themselves this good,

					 					That they are still the air, the subtle food,

					 					To make us feel existence, and to show

					 					How quiet death is. Where soil is, men grow,

					 					Whether to weeds or flowers; but for me,

					 					There is no depth to strike in: I can see

					 					Naught earthly worth my compassing; so stand

					 					Upon a misty, jutting head of land⁠—

					 					Alone? No, no; and by the Orphean lute,

					 					When mad Eurydice is listening to ’t,

					 					I’d rather stand upon this misty peak,

					 					With not a thing to sigh for, or to seek,

					 					But the soft shadow of my thrice seen love,

					 					Than be⁠—I care not what. O meekest dove

					 					Of heaven! O Cynthia, ten times bright and fair!

					 					From thy blue throne, now filling all the air,

					 					Glance but one little beam of temper’d light

					 					Into my bosom, that the dreadful night

					 					And tyranny of love be somewhat scared!

					 					Yet do not so, sweet queen; one torment spared,

					 					Would give a pang to jealous misery,

					 					Worse than the torment’s self: but rather tie

					 					Large wings upon my shoulders, and point out

					 					My love’s far dwelling. Though the playful rout

					 					Of Cupids shun thee, too divine art thou,

					 					Too keen in beauty, for thy silver prow

					 					Not to have dipp’d in love’s most gentle stream.

					 					O be propitious, nor severely deem

					 					My madness impious; for, by all the stars

					 					That tend thy bidding, I do think the bars

					 					That kept my spirit in are burst⁠—that I

					 					Am sailing with thee through the dizzy sky!

					 					How beautiful thou art! The world how deep!

					 					How tremulous-dazzlingly the wheels sweep

					 					Around their axle! Then these gleaming reins,

					 					How lithe! When this thy chariot attains

					 					Its airy goal, haply some bower veils

					 					Those twilight eyes? Those eyes!⁠—my spirit fails⁠—

					 					Dear goddess, help! or the wide gaping air

					 					Will gulf me⁠—help!”⁠—At this, with madden’d stare,

					 					And lifted hands, and trembling lips, he stood;

					 					Like old Deucalion mountain’d o’er the flood,

					 					Or blind Orion hungry for the morn.

					 					And, but from the deep cavern there was borne

					 					A voice, he had been froze to senseless stone;

					 					Nor sigh of his, nor plaint, nor passion’d moan

					 					Had more been heard. Thus swell’d it forth: “Descend,

					 					Young mountaineer! descend where alleys bend

					 					Into the sparry hollows of the world!

					 					Oft hast thou seen bolts of the thunder hurl’d

					 					As from thy threshold; day by day hast been

					 					A little lower than the chilly sheen

					 					Of icy pinnacles, and dipp’dst thine arms

					 					Into the deadening ether that still charms

					 					Their marble being: now, as deep profound

					 					As those are high, descend! He ne’er is crown’d

					 					With immortality, who fears to follow

					 					Where airy voices lead: so through the hollow,

					 					The silent mysteries of earth, descend!”



				 					He heard but the last words, nor could contend

					 					One moment in reflection: for he fled

					 					Into the fearful deep, to hide his head

					 					From the clear moon, the trees, and coming madness.



				 					’Twas far too strange, and wonderful for sadness;

					 					Sharpening, by degrees, his appetite

					 					To dive into the deepest. Dark, nor light,

					 					The region; nor bright, nor sombre wholly,

					 					But mingled up; a gleaming melancholy;

					 					A dusky empire and its diadems;

					 					One faint eternal eventide of gems.

					 					Aye, millions sparkled on a vein of gold,

					 					Along whose track the prince quick footsteps told,

					 					With all its lines abrupt and angular:

					 					Out-shooting sometimes, like a meteor-star,

					 					Through a vast antre; then the metal woof,

					 					Like Vulcan’s rainbow, with some monstrous roof

					 					Curves hugely: now, far in the deep abyss,

					 					It seems an angry lightning, and doth hiss

					 					Fancy into belief: anon it leads

					 					Through winding passages, where sameness breeds

					 					Vexing conceptions of some sudden change;

					 					Whether to silver grots, or giant range

					 					Of sapphire columns, or fantastic bridge

					 					Athwart a flood of crystal. On a ridge

					 					Now fareth he, that o’er the vast beneath

					 					Towers like an ocean-cliff, and whence he seeth

					 					A hundred waterfalls, whose voices come

					 					But as the murmuring surge. Chilly and numb

					 					His bosom grew, when first he, far away,

					 					Descried an orbed diamond, set to fray

					 					Old Darkness from his throne: ’twas like the sun

					 					Uprisen o’er chaos: and with such a stun

					 					Came the amazement, that, absorb’d in it,

					 					He saw not fiercer wonders⁠—past the wit

					 					Of any spirit to tell, but one of those

					 					Who, when this planet’s sphering time doth close

					 					Will be its high remembrancers: who they?

					 					The mighty ones who have made eternal day

					 					For Greece and England. While astonishment

					 					With deep-drawn sighs was quieting, he went

					 					Into a marble gallery, passing through

					 					A mimic temple, so complete and true

					 					In sacred custom, that he well nigh fear’d

					 					To search it inwards; whence far off appear’d,

					 					Through a long pillar’d vista, a fair shrine,

					 					And, just beyond, on light tiptoe divine,

					 					A quiver’d Dian. Stepping awfully,

					 					The youth approach’d; oft turning his veil’d eye

					 					Down sidelong aisles, and into niches old:

					 					And when, more near against the marble cold

					 					He had touch’d his forehead, he began to thread

					 					All courts and passages, where silence dead,

					 					Roused by his whispering footsteps, murmur’d faint:

					 					And long he traversed to and fro, to acquaint

					 					Himself with every mystery, and awe;

					 					Till, weary, he sat down before the maw

					 					Of a wide outlet, fathomless and dim,

					 					To wild uncertainty and shadows grim.

					 					There, when new wonders ceased to float before,

					 					And thoughts of self came on, how crude and sore

					 					The journey homeward to habitual self!

					 					A mad pursuing of the fog-born elf,

					 					Whose flitting lantern, through rude nettle-brier,

					 					Cheats us into a swamp, into a fire,

					 					Into the bosom of a hated thing.



				 					What misery most drowningly doth sing

					 					In lone Endymion’s ear, now he has raught

					 					The goal of consciousness? Ah, ’tis the thought,

					 					The deadly feel of solitude: for lo!

					 					He cannot see the heavens, nor the flow

					 					Of rivers, nor hill-flowers running wild

					 					In pink and purple chequer, nor, up-piled,

					 					The cloudy rack slow journeying in the west,

					 					Like herded elephants; nor felt, nor prest

					 					Cool grass, nor tasted the fresh slumberous air;

					 					But far from such companionship to wear

					 					An unknown time, surcharged with grief, away,

					 					Was now his lot. And must he patient stay,

					 					Tracing fantastic figures with his spear?

					 					“No!” exclaim’d he, “why should I tarry here?”

					 					No! loudly echoed times innumerable.

					 					At which he straightway started, and ’gan tell

					 					His paces back into the temple’s chief;

					 					Warming and glowing strong in the belief

					 					Of help from Dian: so that when again

					 					He caught her airy form, thus did he plain,

					 					Moving more near the while: “O Haunter chaste

					 					Of river sides, and woods, and heathy waste,

					 					Where with thy silver bow and arrows keen

					 					Art thou now forested? O woodland Queen,

					 					What smoothest air thy smoother forehead woos?

					 					Where dost thou listen to the wide halloos

					 					Of thy disparted nymphs? Through what dark tree

					 					Glimmers thy crescent? Wheresoe’er it be,

					 					’Tis in the breath of heaven: thou dost taste

					 					Freedom as none can taste it, nor dost waste

					 					Thy loveliness in dismal elements;

					 					But, finding in our green earth sweet contents,

					 					There livest blissfully. Ah, if to thee

					 					It feels Elysian, how rich to me,

					 					An exiled mortal, sounds its pleasant name!

					 					Within my breast there lives a choking flame⁠—

					 					O let me cool ’t the zephyr-boughs among!

					 					A homeward fever parches up my tongue⁠—

					 					O let me slake it at the running springs!

					 					Upon my ear a noisy nothing rings⁠—

					 					O let me once more hear the linnet’s note!

					 					Before mine eyes thick films and shadows float⁠—

					 					O let me ’noint them with the heaven’s light!

					 					Dost thou now lave thy feet and ankles white?

					 					O think how sweet to me the freshening sluice!

					 					Dost thou now please thy thirst with berry-juice?

					 					O think how this dry palate would rejoice!

					 					If in soft slumber thou dost hear my voice,

					 					O think how I should love a bed of flowers!⁠—

					 					Young goddess! let me see my native bowers!

					 					Deliver me from this rapacious deep!”



				 					Thus ending loudly, as he would o’erleap

					 					His destiny, alert he stood: but when

					 					Obstinate silence came heavily again,

					 					Feeling about for its old couch of space

					 					And airy cradle, lowly bow’d his face,

					 					Desponding, o’er the marble floor’s cold thrill.

					 					But ’twas not long; for, sweeter than the rill

					 					To its old channel, or a swollen tide

					 					To margin sallows, were the leaves he spied,

					 					And flowers, and wreaths, and ready myrtle crowns

					 					Upheaping through the slab: refreshment drowns

					 					Itself, and strives its own delights to hide⁠—

					 					Nor in one spot alone; the floral pride

					 					In a long whispering birth enchanted grew

					 					Before his footsteps; as when heaved anew

					 					Old ocean rolls a lengthened wave to the shore,

					 					Down whose green back the short-lived foam, all hoar,

					 					Bursts gradual, with a wayward indolence.



				 					Increasing still in heart, and pleasant sense,

					 					Upon his fairy journey on he hastes;

					 					So anxious for the end, he scarcely wastes

					 					One moment with his hand among the sweets:

					 					Onward he goes⁠—he stops⁠—his bosom beats

					 					As plainly in his ear, as the faint charm

					 					Of which the throbs were born. This still alarm,

					 					This sleepy music, forced him walk tiptoe:

					 					For it came more softly than the east could blow

					 					Arion’s magic to the Atlantic isles;

					 					Or than the west, made jealous by the smiles

					 					Of throned Apollo, could breathe back the lyre

					 					To seas Ionian and Tyrian.



				 					O did he ever live, that lonely man,

					 					Who loved⁠—and music slew not? ’Tis the pest

					 					Of love, that fairest joys give most unrest;

					 					That things of delicate and tenderest worth

					 					Are swallow’d all, and made a seared dearth,

					 					By one consuming flame: it doth immerse

					 					And suffocate true blessings in a curse.

					 					Half-happy, by comparison of bliss,

					 					Is miserable. ’Twas even so with this

					 					Dew-dropping melody, in the Carian’s ear;

					 					First heaven, then hell, and then forgotten clear,

					 					Vanish’d in elemental passion.



				 					And down some swart abysm he had gone,

					 					Had not a heavenly guide benignant led

					 					To where thick myrtle branches, ’gainst his head

					 					Brushing, awakened: then the sounds again

					 					Went noiseless as a passing noontide rain

					 					Over a bower, where little space he stood;

					 					For as the sunset peeps into a wood,

					 					So saw he panting light, and towards it went

					 					Through winding alleys; and lo, wonderment!

					 					Upon soft verdure saw, one here, one there,

					 					Cupids a-slumbering on their pinions fair.



				 					After a thousand mazes overgone,

					 					At last, with sudden step, he came upon

					 					A chamber, myrtle-wall’d, embower’d high,

					 					Full of light, incense, tender minstrelsy,

					 					And more of beautiful and strange beside:

					 					For on a silken couch of rosy pride,

					 					In midst of all, there lay a sleeping youth

					 					Of fondest beauty; fonder, in fair sooth,

					 					Than sighs could fathom, or contentment reach:

					 					And coverlids gold-tinted like the peach,

					 					Or ripe October’s faded marigolds,

					 					Fell sleek about him in a thousand folds⁠—

					 					Not hiding up an Apollonian curve

					 					Of neck and shoulder, nor the tenting swerve

					 					Of knee from knee, nor ankles pointing light;

					 					But rather, giving them to the fill’d sight

					 					Officiously. Sideway his face reposed

					 					On one white arm, and tenderly unclosed,

					 					By tenderest pressure, a faint damask mouth

					 					To slumbery pout; just as the morning south

					 					Disparts a dew-lipp’d rose. Above his head,

					 					Four lily stalks did their white honours wed

					 					To make a coronal; and round him grew

					 					All tendrils green, of every bloom and hue,

					 					Together intertwin’d and trammell’d fresh:

					 					The vine of glossy sprout; the ivy mesh,

					 					Shading its Ethiop berries; and woodbine,

					 					Of velvet-leaves and bugle-blooms divine;

					 					Convolvulus in streaked vases flush;

					 					The creeper, mellowing for an autumn blush;

					 					And virgin’s bower, trailing airily;

					 					With others of the sisterhood. Hard by,

					 					Stood serene Cupids watching silently.

					 					One, kneeling to a lyre, touch’d the strings,

					 					Muffling to death the pathos with his wings;

					 					And, ever and anon, uprose to look

					 					At the youth’s slumber; while another took

					 					A willow bough, distilling odorous dew,

					 					And shook it on his hair; another flew

					 					In through the woven roof, and fluttering-wise

					 					Rain’d violets upon his sleeping eyes.



				 					At these enchantments, and yet many more,

					 					The breathless Latmian wonder’d o’er and o’er;

					 					Until impatient in embarrassment,

					 					He forthright pass’d, and lightly treading went

					 					To that same feather’d lyrist, who straightway,

					 					Smiling, thus whisper’d: “Though from upper day

					 					Thou art a wanderer, and thy presence here

					 					Might seem unholy, be of happy cheer!

					 					For ’tis the nicest touch of human honour,

					 					When some ethereal and high-favouring donor

					 					Presents immortal bowers to mortal sense;

					 					As now ’tis done to thee, Endymion. Hence

					 					Was I in no wise startled. So recline

					 					Upon these living flowers. Here is wine,

					 					Alive with sparkles⁠—never, I aver,

					 					Since Ariadne was a vintager,

					 					So cool a purple: taste these juicy pears,

					 					Sent me by sad Vertumnus, when his fears

					 					Were high about Pomona: here is cream.

					 					Deepening to richness from a snowy gleam;

					 					Sweeter than that nurse Amalthea skimm’d

					 					For the boy Jupiter: and here, undimm’d

					 					By any touch, a bunch of blooming plums

					 					Ready to melt between an infant’s gums:

					 					And here is manna pick’d from Syrian trees.

					 					In starlight, by the three Hesperides.

					 					Feast on, and meanwhile I will let thee know

					 					Of all these things around us.” He did so,

					 					Still brooding o’er the cadence of his lyre;

					 					And thus: “I need not any hearing tire

					 					By telling how the sea-born goddess pined

					 					For a mortal youth, and how she strove to bind

					 					Him all in all unto her doating self.

					 					Who would not be so prison’d? but, fond elf,

					 					He was content to let her amorous plea

					 					Faint through his careless arms; content to see

					 					An unseized heaven dying at his feet;

					 					Content, O fool! to make a cold retreat,

					 					When on the pleasant grass such love, love-lorn,

					 					Lay sorrowing; when every tear was born

					 					Of diverse passion; when her lips and eyes

					 					Were closed in sullen moisture, and quick sighs

					 					Came vex’d and pettish through her nostrils small.

					 					Hush! no exclaim⁠—yet, justly might’st thou call

					 					Curses upon his head.⁠—I was half glad,

					 					But my poor mistress went distract and mad,

					 					When the boar tusk’d him: so away she flew

					 					To Jove’s high throne, and by her plainings drew

					 					Immortal tear-drops down the thunderer’s beard.

					 					Whereon, it was decreed he should be rear’d

					 					Each summer-time to life. Lo! this is he,

					 					That same Adonis, safe in the privacy

					 					Of this still region all his winter-sleep.

					 					Aye, sleep; for when our love-sick queen did weep

					 					Over his waned corse, the tremulous shower

					 					Heal’d up the wound, and, with a balmy power,

					 					Medicined death to a lengthened drowsiness:

					 					The which she fills with visions, and doth dress

					 					In all this quiet luxury; and hath set

					 					Us young immortals, without any let,

					 					To watch his slumber through. ’Tis well nigh pass’d,

					 					Even to a moment’s filling up, and fast

					 					She scuds with summer breezes, to pant through

					 					The first long kiss, warm firstling, to renew

					 					Embower’d sports in Cytherea’s isle.

					 					Look! how those winged listeners all this while

					 					Stand anxious: see! behold!”⁠—This clamant word

					 					Broke through the careful silence; for they heard

					 					A rustling noise of leaves, and out there flutter’d

					 					Pigeons and doves: Adonis something mutter’d,

					 					The while one hand, that erst upon his thigh

					 					Lay dormant, moved convulsed and gradually

					 					Up to his forehead. Then there was a hum

					 					Of sudden voices, echoing, “Come! come!

					 					Arise! awake! Clear summer has forth walk’d

					 					Unto the clover-sward, and she has talk’d

					 					Full soothingly to every nested finch:

					 					Rise, Cupids! or we’ll give the bluebell pinch

					 					To your dimpled arms. Once more sweet life begin!”

					 					At this, from every side they hurried in,

					 					Rubbing their sleepy eyes with lazy wrists,

					 					And doubling overhead their little fists

					 					In backward yawns. But all were soon alive:

					 					For, as delicious wine doth, sparkling, dive

					 					In nectar’d clouds and curls through water fair,

					 					So from the arbour roof down swell’d an air

					 					Odorous and enlivening; making all

					 					To laugh, and play, and sing, and loudly call

					 					For their sweet queen; when lo! the wreathed green

					 					Disparted, and far upward could be seen

					 					Blue heaven, and a silver car, air-borne,

					 					Whose silent wheels, fresh wet from clouds of morn,

					 					Spun off a drizzling dew,⁠—which falling chill

					 					On soft Adonis’ shoulders, made him still

					 					Nestle and turn uneasily about.

					 					Soon were the white doves plain, with necks stretch’d out,

					 					And silken traces lighten’d in descent;

					 					And soon, returning from love’s banishment,

					 					Queen Venus leaning downward open-arm’d:

					 					Her shadow fell upon his breast, and charm’d

					 					A tumult to his heart, and a new life

					 					Into his eyes. Ah, miserable strife,

					 					But for her comforting! unhappy sight,

					 					But meeting her blue orbs! Who, who can write

					 					Of these first minutes? The unchariest muse

					 					To embracements warm as theirs makes coy excuse.



				 					O it has ruffled every spirit there,

					 					Saving Love’s self, who stands superb to share

					 					The general gladness: awfully he stands;

					 					A sovereign quell is in his waving hands;

					 					No sight can bear the lightning of his bow;

					 					His quiver is mysterious, none can know

					 					What themselves think of it; from forth his eyes

					 					There darts strange light of varied hues and dyes:

					 					A scowl is sometimes on his brow, but who

					 					Look full upon it feel anon the blue

					 					Of his fair eyes run liquid through their souls.

					 					Endymion feels it, and no more controls

					 					The burning prayer within him; so, bent low,

					 					He had begun a plaining of his woe.

					 					But Venus, bending forward, said: “My child,

					 					Favour this gentle youth; his days are wild

					 					With love⁠—he⁠—but alas! too well I see

					 					Thou know’st the deepness of his misery.

					 					Ah, smile not so, my son: I tell thee true,

					 					That when through heavy hours I used to rue

					 					The endless sleep of this new-born Adon’,

					 					This stranger ay I pitied. For upon

					 					A dreary morning once I fled away

					 					Into the breezy clouds, to weep and pray

					 					For this my love: for vexing Mars had teased

					 					Me even to tears; thence, when a little eased,

					 					Down-looking, vacant, through a hazy wood,

					 					I saw this youth as he despairing stood:

					 					Those same dark curls blown vagrant in the wind;

					 					Those same full fringed lids a constant blind

					 					Over his sullen eyes: I saw him throw

					 					Himself on wither’d leaves, even as though

					 					Death had come sudden; for no jot he moved,

					 					Yet mutter’d wildly. I could hear he loved

					 					Some fair immortal, and that his embrace

					 					Had zoned her through the night. There is no trace

					 					Of this in heaven: I have mark’d each cheek,

					 					And find it is the vainest thing to seek;

					 					And that of all things ’tis kept secretest.

					 					Endymion! one day thou wilt be blest:

					 					So still obey the guiding hand that fends

					 					Thee safely through these wonders for sweet ends.

					 					’Tis a concealment needful in extreme;

					 					And if I guessed not so, the sunny beam

					 					Thou shouldst mount up with me. Now adieu!

					 					Here must we leave thee.”⁠—At these words upflew

					 					The impatient doves, uprose the floating car,

					 					Up went the hum celestial. High afar

					 					The Latmian saw them minish into naught;

					 					And, when all were clear vanish’d, still he caught

					 					A vivid lightning from that dreadful bow.

					 					When all was darken’d, with Ætnean throe

					 					The earth closed⁠—gave a solitary moan⁠—

					 					And left him once again in twilight lone.



				 					He did not rave, he did not stare aghast,

					 					For all those visions were o’ergone, and past,

					 					And he in loneliness: he felt assured

					 					Of happy times, when all he had endured

					 					Would seem a feather to the mighty prize.

					 					So, with unusual gladness, on he hies

					 					Through caves, and palaces of mottled ore,

					 					Gold dome, and crystal wall, and turquois floor,

					 					Black polish’d porticoes of awful shade,

					 					And, at the last, a diamond balustrade,

					 					Leading afar past wild magnificence,

					 					Spiral through ruggedest loopholes, and thence

					 					Stretching across a void, then guiding o’er

					 					Enormous chasms, where, all foam and roar,

					 					Streams subterranean tease their granite beds;

					 					Then heighten’d just above the silvery heads

					 					Of a thousand fountains, so that he could dash

					 					The waters with his spear; but at the splash,

					 					Done heedlessly, those spouting columns rose

					 					Sudden a poplar’s height, and ’gan to enclose

					 					His diamond path with fretwork, streaming round

					 					Alive, and dazzling cool, and with a sound,

					 					Haply, like dolphin tumults, when sweet shells

					 					Welcome the float of Thetis. Long he dwells

					 					On this delight; for, every minute’s space,

					 					The streams with changed magic interlace:

					 					Sometimes like delicatest lattices,

					 					Cover’d with crystal vines; then weeping trees,

					 					Moving about as in a gentle wind,

					 					Which, in a wink, to watery gauze refined,

					 					Pour’d into shapes of curtain’d canopies,

					 					Spangled, and rich with liquid broideries

					 					Of flowers, peacocks, swans, and naiads fair.

					 					Swifter than lightning went these wonders rare;

					 					And then the water, into stubborn streams

					 					Collecting, mimick’d the wrought oaken beams,

					 					Pillars, and frieze, and high fantastic roof,

					 					Of those dusk places in times far aloof

					 					Cathedrals call’d. He bade a loth farewell

					 					To these founts Protean, passing gulf, and dell,

					 					And torrent, and ten thousand jutting shapes,

					 					Half seen through deepest gloom, and griesly gapes,

					 					Blackening on every side, and overhead

					 					A vaulted dome like Heaven’s, far bespread

					 					With starlight gems: aye, all so huge and strange,

					 					The solitary felt a hurried change

					 					Working within him into something dreary,⁠—

					 					Vex’d like a morning eagle, lost, and weary,

					 					And purblind amid foggy, midnight wolds.

					 					But he revives at once: for who beholds

					 					New sudden things, nor casts his mental slough?

					 					Forth from a rugged arch, in the dusk below,

					 					Came mother Cybele! alone⁠—alone⁠—

					 					In sombre chariot; dark foldings thrown

					 					About her majesty, and front death-pale,

					 					With turrets crown’d. Four maned lions hale

					 					The sluggish wheels; solemn their toothed maws,

					 					Their surly eyes brow-hidden, heavy paws

					 					Uplifted drowsily, and nervy tails

					 					Cowering their tawny brushes. Silent sails

					 					This shadowy queen athwart, and faints away

					 					In another gloomy arch.



				 					Wherefore delay,

					 					Young traveller, in such a mournful place?

					 					Art thou wayworn, or canst not further trace

					 					The diamond path? And does it indeed end

					 					Abrupt in middle air? Yet earthward bend

					 					Thy forehead, and to Jupiter cloud-borne

					 					Call ardently! He was indeed wayworn;

					 					Abrupt, in middle air, his way was lost;

					 					To cloud-borne Jove he bowed, and there crost

					 					Towards him a large eagle, ’twixt whose wings,

					 					Without one impious word, himself he flings,

					 					Committed to the darkness and the gloom:

					 					Down, down, uncertain to what pleasant doom,

					 					Swift as a fathoming plummet down he fell

					 					Through unknown things; till exhaled asphodel,

					 					And rose, with spicy fannings interbreathed,

					 					Came swelling forth where little caves were wreathed

					 					So thick with leaves and mosses, that they seem’d

					 					Large honeycombs of green, and freshly teem’d

					 					With airs delicious. In the greenest nook

					 					The eagle landed him, and farewell took.



				 					It was a jasmine bower, all bestrown

					 					With golden moss. His every sense had grown

					 					Ethereal for pleasure; ’bove his head

					 					Flew a delight half-graspable; his tread

					 					Was Hesperean; to his capable ears

					 					Silence was music from the holy spheres;

					 					A dewy luxury was in his eyes;

					 					The little flowers felt his pleasant sighs

					 					And stirr’d them faintly. Verdant cave and cell

					 					He wander’d through, oft wondering at such swell

					 					Of sudden exaltation: but, “Alas!”

					 					Said he, “will all this gush of feeling pass

					 					Away in solitude? And must they wane,

					 					Like melodies upon a sandy plain,

					 					Without an echo? Then shall I be left

					 					So sad, so melancholy, so bereft!

					 					Yet still I feel immortal! O my love,

					 					My breath of life, where art thou? High above,

					 					Dancing before the morning gates of heaven?

					 					Or keeping watch among those starry seven,

					 					Old Atlas’ children? Art a maid of the waters,

					 					One of shell-winding Triton’s bright-hair’d daughters?

					 					Or art, impossible! a nymph of Dian’s,

					 					Weaving a coronal of tender scions

					 					For very idleness? Where’er thou art,

					 					Methinks it now is at my will to start

					 					Into thine arms; to scare Aurora’s train,

					 					And snatch thee from the morning; o’er the main

					 					To scud like a wild bird, and take thee off

					 					From thy sea-foamy cradle; or to doff

					 					Thy shepherd vest, and woo thee ’mid fresh leaves.

					 					No, no, too eagerly my soul deceives

					 					Its powerless self: I know this cannot be.

					 					O let me then by some sweet dreaming flee

					 					To her entrancements: hither sleep awhile!

					 					Hither most gentle sleep! and soothing foil

					 					For some few hours the coming solitude.”



				 					Thus spake he, and that moment felt endued

					 					With power to dream deliciously; so wound

					 					Through a dim passage, searching till he found

					 					The smoothest mossy bed and deepest, where

					 					He threw himself, and just into the air

					 					Stretching his indolent arms, he took, O bliss!

					 					A naked waist: “Fair Cupid, whence is this?”

					 					A well-known voice sigh’d, “Sweetest, here am I!”

					 					At which soft ravishment, with doting cry

					 					They trembled to each other.⁠—Helicon!

					 					O fountain’d hill! Old Homer’s Helicon!

					 					That thou wouldst spout a little streamlet o’er

					 					These sorry pages; then the verse would soar

					 					And sing above this gentle pair, like lark

					 					Over his nested young: but all is dark

					 					Around thine aged top, and thy clear fount

					 					Exhales in mists to heaven. Aye, the count

					 					Of mighty Poets is made up; the scroll

					 					Is folded by the Muses; the bright roll

					 					Is in Apollo’s hand: our dazed eyes

					 					Have seen a new tinge in the western skies:

					 					The world has done its duty. Yet, oh yet,

					 					Although the sun of poesy is set,

					 					These lovers did embrace, and we must weep

					 					That there is no old power left to steep

					 					A quill immortal in their joyous tears.

					 					Long time in silence did their anxious fears

					 					Question that thus it was: long time they lay

					 					Fondling and kissing every doubt away;

					 					Long time ere soft caressing sobs began

					 					To mellow into words, and then there ran

					 					Two bubbling springs of talk from their sweet lips.

					 					“O known Unknown! from whom my being sips

					 					Such darling essence, wherefore may I not

					 					Be ever in these arms? in this sweet spot

					 					Pillow my chin for ever? ever press

					 					These toying hands and kiss their smooth excess?

					 					Why not for ever and for ever feel

					 					That breath about my eyes? Ah, thou wilt steal

					 					Away from me again, indeed, indeed⁠—

					 					Thou wilt be gone away, and wilt not heed

					 					My lonely madness. Speak, delicious fair,

					 					Is⁠—is it to be so? No! Who will dare

					 					To pluck thee from me? And, of thine own will,

					 					Full well I feel thou wouldst not leave me. Still

					 					Let me entwine thee surer, surer⁠—now

					 					How can we part? Elysium! Who art thou?

					 					Who, that thou canst not be for ever here,

					 					Or lift me with thee to some starry sphere?

					 					Enchantress! tell me by this soft embrace,

					 					By the most soft completion of thy face,

					 					Those lips, O slippery blisses, twinkling eyes,

					 					And by these tenderest, milky sovereignties⁠—

					 					These tenderest, and by the nectar-wine,

					 					The passion”⁠—“O doved Ida the divine!

					 					Endymion! dearest! Ah, unhappy me!

					 					His soul will ’scape us⁠—O felicity!

					 					How he does love me! His poor temples beat

					 					To the very tune of love⁠—how sweet, sweet, sweet.

					 					Revive, dear youth, or I shall faint and die;

					 					Revive, or these soft hours will hurry by

					 					In tranced dullness; speak, and let that spell

					 					Affright this lethargy! I cannot quell

					 					Its heavy pressure, and will press at least

					 					My lips to thine, that they may richly feast

					 					Until we taste the life of love again.

					 					What! dost thou move? dost kiss? O bliss! O pain!

					 					I love thee, youth, more than I can conceive;

					 					And so long absence from thee doth bereave

					 					My soul of any rest: yet must I hence:

					 					Yet, can I not to starry eminence

					 					Uplift thee; nor for very shame can own

					 					Myself to thee. Ah, dearest, do not groan

					 					Or thou wilt force me from this secrecy,

					 					And I must blush in heaven. O that I

					 					Had done it already; that the dreadful smiles

					 					At my lost brightness, my impassion’d wiles,

					 					Had waned from Olympus’ solemn height,

					 					And from all serious Gods; that our delight

					 					Was quite forgotten, save of us alone!

					 					And wherefore so ashamed? ’Tis but to atone

					 					For endless pleasure, by some coward blushes:

					 					Yet must I be a coward!⁠—Honour rushes

					 					Too palpable before me⁠—the sad look

					 					Of Jove⁠—Minerva’s start⁠—no bosom shook

					 					With awe of purity⁠—no Cupid pinion

					 					In reverence veiled⁠—my crystalline dominion

					 					Half lost, and all old hymns made nullity!

					 					But what is this to love? O I could fly

					 					With thee into the ken of heavenly powers,

					 					So thou wouldst thus, for many sequent hours,

					 					Press me so sweetly. Now I swear at once

					 					That I am wise, that Pallas is a dunce⁠—

					 					Perhaps her love like mine is but unknown⁠—

					 					O I do think that I have been alone

					 					In chastity: yes, Pallas has been sighing,

					 					While every eve saw me my hair uptying

					 					With fingers cool as aspen leaves. Sweet love,

					 					I was as vague as solitary dove,

					 					Nor knew that nests were built. Now a soft kiss⁠—

					 					Aye, by that kiss, I vow an endless bliss,

					 					An immortality of passion’s thine:

					 					Ere long I will exalt thee to the shine

					 					Of heaven ambrosial; and we will shade

					 					Ourselves whole summers by a river glade;

					 					And I will tell thee stories of the sky,

					 					And breathe thee whispers of its minstrelsy.

					 					My happy love will overwing all bounds!

					 					O let me melt into thee; let the sounds

					 					Of our close voices marry at their birth;

					 					Let us entwine hoveringly⁠—O dearth

					 					Of human words! roughness of mortal speech!

					 					Lispings empyrean will I sometime teach

					 					Thine honey’d tongue⁠—lute-breathings which I gasp

					 					To have thee understand, now while I clasp

					 					Thee thus, and weep for fondness⁠—I am pain’d.

					 					Endymion: woe! woe! is grief contain’d

					 					In the very deeps of pleasure, my sole life?”⁠—

					 					Hereat, with many sobs, her gentle strife

					 					Melted into a languor. He return’d

					 					Entranced vows and tears.



				 					Ye who have yearn’d

					 					With too much passion, will here stay and pity,

					 					For the mere sake of truth; as ’tis a ditty

					 					Not of these days, but long ago ’twas told

					 					By a cavern wind unto a forest old;

					 					And then the forest told it in a dream

					 					To a sleeping lake, whose cool and level gleam

					 					A poet caught as he was journeying

					 					To Phœbus’ shrine; and in it he did fling

					 					His weary limbs, bathing an hour’s space,

					 					And after, straight in that inspired place

					 					He sang the story up into the air,

					 					Giving it universal freedom. There

					 					Has it been ever sounding for those ears

					 					Whose tips are glowing hot. The legend cheers

					 					Yon sentinel stars; and he who listens to it

					 					Must surely be self-doom’d or he will rue it:

					 					For quenchless burnings come upon the heart.

					 					Made fiercer by a fear lest any part

					 					Should be engulfed in the eddying wind.

					 					As much as here is penn’d doth always find

					 					A resting-place, thus much comes clear and plain;

					 					Anon the strange voice is upon the wane⁠—

					 					And ’tis but echoed from departing sound,

					 					That the fair visitant at last unwound

					 					Her gentle limbs, and left the youth asleep.⁠—

					 					Thus the tradition of the gusty deep.



				 					Now turn we to our former chroniclers.

					 					Endymion awoke, that grief of hers

					 					Sweet paining on his ear: he sickly guess’d

					 					How lone he was once more, and sadly press’d

					 					His empty arms together, hung his head,

					 					And most forlorn upon that widow’d bed

					 					Sat silently. Love’s madness he had known:

					 					Often with more than tortured lion’s groan

					 					Moanings had burst from him; but now that rage

					 					Had pass’d away: no longer did he wage

					 					A rough-voiced war against the dooming stars.

					 					No, he had felt too much for such harsh jars:

					 					The lyre of his soul Æolian tuned

					 					Forgot all violence, and but communed

					 					With melancholy thought: O he had swoon’d

					 					Drunken from pleasure’s nipple; and his love

					 					Henceforth was dove-like.⁠—Loth was he to move

					 					From the imprinted couch, and when he did,

					 					’Twas with slow, languid paces, and face hid

					 					In muffling hands. So temper’d, out he stray’d

					 					Half seeing visions that might have dismay’d

					 					Alecto’s serpents; ravishments more keen

					 					Than Hermes’ pipe, when anxious he did lean

					 					Over eclipsing eyes: and at the last

					 					It was a sounding grotto, vaulted, vast,

					 					O’erstudded with a thousand, thousand pearls,

					 					And crimson-mouthed shells with stubborn curls,

					 					Of every shape and size, even to the bulk

					 					In which whales harbour close, to brood and sulk

					 					Against an endless storm. Moreover too,

					 					Fish-semblances, of green and azure hue,

					 					Ready to snort their streams. In this cool wonder

					 					Endymion sat down, and ’gan to ponder

					 					On all his life: his youth, up to the day

					 					When ’mid acclaim, and feasts, and garlands gay,

					 					He stept upon his shepherd throne: the look

					 					Of his white palace in wild forest nook,

					 					And all the revels he had lorded there:

					 					Each tender maiden whom he once thought fair,

					 					With every friend and fellow-woodlander⁠—

					 					Pass’d like a dream before him. Then the spur

					 					Of the old bards to mighty deeds: his plans

					 					To nurse the golden age ’mong shepherd clans:

					 					That wondrous night: the great Pan festival:

					 					His sister’s sorrow; and his wanderings all,

					 					Until into the earth’s deep maw he rush’d:

					 					Then all its buried magic, till it flush’d

					 					High with excessive love. “And now,” thought he,

					 					“How long must I remain in jeopardy

					 					Of blank amazements that amaze no more?

					 					Now I have tasted her sweet soul to the core,

					 					All other depths are shallow; essences,

					 					Once spiritual, are like muddy lees,

					 					Meant but to fertilize my earthly root,

					 					And make my branches lift a golden fruit

					 					Into the bloom of heaven: other light,

					 					Though it be quick and sharp enough to blight

					 					The Olympian eagle’s vision, is dark,

					 					Dark as the parentage of chaos. Hark!

					 					My silent thoughts are echoing from these shells;

					 					Or they are but the ghosts, the dying swells

					 					Of noises far away?⁠—list!”⁠—Hereupon

					 					He kept an anxious ear. The humming tone

					 					Came louder, and behold, there as he lay,

					 					On either side outgush’d, with misty spray,

					 					A copious spring; and both together dash’d

					 					Swift, mad, fantastic round the rocks, and lash’d

					 					Among the conchs and shells of the lofty grot,

					 					Leaving a trickling dew. At last they shot

					 					Down from the ceiling’s height, pouring a noise

					 					As of some breathless racers whose hopes poise

					 					Upon the last few steps, and with spent force

					 					Along the ground they took a winding course.

					 					Endymion follow’d⁠—for it seem’d that one

					 					Ever pursued, the other strove to shun⁠—

					 					Follow’d their languid mazes, till well nigh

					 					He had left thinking of the mystery,⁠—

					 					And was now rapt in tender hoverings

					 					Over the vanish’d bliss. Ah? what is it sings

					 					His dream away? What melodies are these?

					 					They sound as through the whispering of trees,

					 					Not native in such barren vaults. Give ear!



				 					“O Arethusa, peerless nymph! why fear

					 					Such tenderness as mine? Great Dian, why,

					 					Why didst thou hear her prayer? O that I

					 					Were rippling round her dainty fairness now,

					 					Circling about her waist, and striving how

					 					To entice her to a dive! then stealing in

					 					Between her luscious lips and eyelids thin.

					 					O that her shining hair was in the sun,

					 					And I distilling from it thence to run

					 					In amorous rillets down her shrinking form!

					 					To linger on her lily shoulders, warm

					 					Between her kissing breasts, and every charm

					 					Touch raptured!⁠—see how painfully I flow:

					 					Fair maid, be pitiful to my great woe.

					 					Stay, stay thy weary course, and let me lead,

					 					A happy wooer, to the flowery mead

					 					Where all that beauty snared me.”⁠—“Cruel god,

					 					Desist! or my offended mistress’ nod

					 					Will stagnate all thy fountains:⁠—tease me not

					 					With siren words⁠—Ah, have I really got

					 					Such power to madden thee? And is it true⁠—

					 					Away, away, or I shall dearly rue

					 					My very thoughts: in mercy then away,

					 					Kindest Alpheus, for should I obey

					 					My own dear will, ’twould be a deadly bane.”

					 					“O, Oread-Queen! would that thou hadst a pain

					 					Like this of mine, then would I fearless turn

					 					And be a criminal.” “Alas, I burn,

					 					I shudder⁠—gentle river, get thee hence.

					 					Alpheus! thou enchanter! every sense

					 					Of mine was once made perfect in these woods.

					 					Fresh breezes, bowery lawns, and innocent floods,

					 					Ripe fruits, and lonely couch, contentment gave;

					 					But ever since I heedlessly did lave

					 					In thy deceitful stream, a panting glow

					 					Grew strong within me: wherefore serve me so,

					 					And call it love? Alas! ’twas cruelty.

					 					Not once more did I close my happy eye

					 					Amid the thrush’s song. Away! avaunt!

					 					O ’twas a cruel thing.”⁠—“Now thou dost taunt

					 					So softly, Arethusa, that I think

					 					If thou wast playing on my shady brink,

					 					Thou wouldst bathe once again. Innocent maid!

					 					Stifle thine heart no more;⁠—nor be afraid

					 					Of angry powers: there are deities

					 					Will shade us with their wings. Those fitful sighs

					 					’Tis almost death to hear: O let me pour

					 					A dewy balm upon them!⁠—fear no more,

					 					Sweet Arethusa! Dian’s self must feel

					 					Sometimes these very pangs. Dear maiden, steal

					 					Blushing into my soul, and let us fly

					 					These dreary caverns for the open sky.

					 					I will delight thee all my winding course,

					 					From the green sea up to my hidden source

					 					About Arcadian forests; and will show

					 					The channels where my coolest waters flow

					 					Through mossy rocks; where ’mid exuberant green,

					 					I roam in pleasant darkness, more unseen

					 					Than Saturn in his exile; where I brim

					 					Round flowery islands, and take thence a skim

					 					Of mealy sweets, which myriads of bees

					 					Buzz from their honey’d wings: and thou shouldst please

					 					Thyself to choose the richest, where we might

					 					Be incense-pillow’d every summer night.

					 					Doff all sad fears, thou white deliciousness,

					 					And let us be thus comforted; unless

					 					Thou couldst rejoice to see my hopeless stream

					 					Hurry distracted from Sol’s temperate beam,

					 					And pour to death along some hungry sands.”⁠—

					 					“What can I do, Alpheus? Dian stands

					 					Severe before me: persecuting fate!

					 					Unhappy Arethusa! thou wast late

					 					A huntress free in”⁠—At this, sudden fell

					 					Those two sad streams adown a fearful dell.

					 					The Latmian listen’d, but he heard no more,

					 					Save echo, faint repeating o’er and o’er

					 					The name of Arethusa. On the verge

					 					Of that dark gulf he wept, and said; “I urge

					 					Thee, gentle Goddess of my pilgrimage,

					 					By our eternal hopes, to soothe, to assuage,

					 					If thou art powerful, these lovers’ pains;

					 					And make them happy in some happy plains.”



				 					He turn’d⁠—there was a whelming sound⁠—he stept,

					 					There was a cooler light; and so he kept

					 					Towards it by a sandy path, and lo!

					 					More suddenly than doth a moment go,

					 					The visions of the earth were gone and fled⁠—

					 					He saw the giant sea above his head.





III


				 					There are who lord it o’er their fellow-men

					 					With most prevailing tinsel: who unpen

					 					Their baaing vanities, to browse away

					 					The comfortable green and juicy hay

					 					From human pastures; or, O torturing fact!

					 					Who, through an idiot blink, will see unpack’d

					 					Fire-branded foxes to sear up and singe

					 					Our gold and ripe-ear’d hopes. With not one tinge

					 					Of sanctuary splendour, not a sight

					 					Able to face an owl’s, they still are dight

					 					By the blear-eyed nations in empurpled vests,

					 					And crowns, and turbans. With unladen breasts,

					 					Save of blown self-applause, they proudly mount

					 					To their spirit’s perch, their being’s high account,

					 					Their tiptop nothings, their dull skies, their thrones⁠—

					 					Amid the fierce intoxicating tones

					 					Of trumpets, shoutings, and belabour’d drums,

					 					And sudden cannon. Ah! how all this hums,

					 					In wakeful ears, like uproar past and gone⁠—

					 					Like thunder-clouds that spake to Babylon,

					 					And set those old Chaldeans to their tasks.⁠—

					 					Are then regalities all gilded masks?

					 					No, there are throned seats unscalable

					 					But by a patient wing, a constant spell,

					 					Or by ethereal things that, unconfined,

					 					Can make a ladder of the eternal wind,

					 					And poise about in cloudy thunder-tents

					 					To watch the abysm-birth of elements.

					 					Aye, ’bove the withering of old-lipp’d Fate

					 					A thousand Powers keep religious state,

					 					In water, fiery realm, and airy bourne;

					 					And, silent as a consecrated urn,

					 					Hold spherey sessions for a season due.

					 					Yet few of these far majesties, ah, few!

					 					Have bared their operations to this globe⁠—

					 					Few, who with gorgeous pageantry enrobe

					 					Our piece of heaven⁠—whose benevolence

					 					Shakes hand with our own Ceres; every sense

					 					Filling with spiritual sweets to plenitude,

					 					As bees gorge full their cells. And, by the feud

					 					’Twixt Nothing and Creation, I here swear,

					 					Eterne Apollo! that thy Sister fair

					 					Is of all these the gentlier-mightiest.

					 					When thy gold breath is misting in the west,

					 					She unobserved steals unto her throne,

					 					And there she sits most meek and most alone;

					 					As if she had not pomp subservient;

					 					As if thine eye, high Poet! was not bent

					 					Towards her with the Muses in thine heart;

					 					As if the minist’ring stars kept not apart,

					 					Waiting for silver-footed messages.

					 					O Moon! the oldest shades ’mong oldest trees

					 					Feel palpitations when thou lookest in:

					 					O Moon! old boughs lisp forth a holier din

					 					The while they feel thine airy fellowship.

					 					Thou dost bless everywhere, with silver lip

					 					Kissing dead things to life. The sleeping kine,

					 					Couch’d in thy brightness, dream of fields divine:

					 					Innumerable mountains rise, and rise,

					 					Ambitious for the hallowing of thine eyes;

					 					And yet thy benediction passeth not

					 					One obscure hiding-place, one little spot

					 					Where pleasure may be sent: the nested wren

					 					Has thy fair face within its tranquil ken,

					 					And from beneath a sheltering ivy leaf

					 					Takes glimpses of thee; thou art a relief

					 					To the poor patient oyster, where it sleeps

					 					Within its pearly house.⁠—The mighty deeps,

					 					The monstrous sea is thine⁠—the myriad sea!

					 					O Moon! far-spooming Ocean bows to thee,

					 					And Tellus feels his forehead’s cumbrous load.



				 					Cynthia! where art thou now? What far abode

					 					Of green or silvery bower doth enshrine

					 					Such utmost beauty? Alas, thou dost pine

					 					For one as sorrowful: thy cheek is pale

					 					For one whose cheek is pale: thou dost bewail

					 					His tears, who weeps for thee. Where dost thou sigh?

					 					Ah! surely that light peeps from Vesper’s eye,

					 					Or what a thing is love! ’Tis She, but lo!

					 					How changed, how full of ache, how gone in woe!

					 					She dies at the thinnest cloud; her loveliness

					 					Is wan on Neptune’s blue: yet there’s a stress

					 					Of love-spangles, just off yon cape of trees,

					 					Dancing upon the waves, as if to please

					 					The curly foam with amorous influence.

					 					O, not so idle: for down-glancing thence,

					 					She fathoms eddies, and runs wild about

					 					O’erwhelming water-courses; scaring out

					 					The thorny sharks from hiding-holes, and fright’ning

					 					Their savage eyes with unaccustom’d lightning.

					 					Where will the splendour be content to reach?

					 					O love! how potent hast thou been to teach

					 					Strange journeyings! Wherever beauty dwells,

					 					In gulf or aerie, mountains or deep dells,

					 					In light, in gloom, in star or blazing sun,

					 					Thou pointest out the way, and straight ’tis won.

					 					Amid his toil thou gavest Leander breath;

					 					Thou leddest Orpheus through the gleams of death;

					 					Thou madest Pluto bear thin element;

					 					And now, O winged Chieftain! thou hast sent

					 					A moonbeam to the deep, deep water-world,

					 					To find Endymion.



				 					On gold sand impearl’d

					 					With lily shells, and pebbles milky white,

					 					Poor Cynthia greeted him, and soothed her light

					 					Against his pallid face: he felt the charm

					 					To breathlessness, and suddenly a warm

					 					Of his heart’s blood: ’twas very sweet; he stay’d

					 					His wandering steps, and half-entranced laid

					 					His head upon a tuft of straggling weeds,

					 					To taste the gentle moon, and freshening beads,

					 					Lash’d from the crystal roof by fishes’ tails.

					 					And so he kept, until the rosy veils

					 					Mantling the east, by Aurora’s peering hand

					 					Were lifted from the water’s breast, and fann’d

					 					Into sweet air; and sober’d morning came

					 					Meekly through billows:⁠—when like taper-flame

					 					Left sudden by a dallying breath of air,

					 					He rose in silence, and once more ’gan fare

					 					Along his fated way.



				 					Far had he roam’d,

					 					With nothing save the hollow vast, that foam’d

					 					Above, around, and at his feet; save things

					 					More dead than Morpheus’ imaginings:

					 					Old rusted anchors, helmets, breastplates large

					 					Of gone sea-warriors: brazen beaks and targe;

					 					Rudders that for a hundred years had lost

					 					The sway of human hand; gold vase emboss’d

					 					With long-forgotten story, and wherein

					 					No reveller had ever dipp’d a chin

					 					But those of Saturn’s vintage; mouldering scrolls,

					 					Writ in the tongue of heaven, by those souls

					 					Who first were on the earth; and sculptures rude

					 					In ponderous stone, developing the mood

					 					Of ancient Nox;⁠—then skeletons of man,

					 					Of beast, behemoth, and leviathan,

					 					And elephant, and eagle, and huge jaw

					 					Of nameless monster. A cold leaden awe

					 					These secrets struck into him; and unless

					 					Dian had chased away that heaviness,

					 					He might have died: but now, with cheered feel,

					 					He onward kept; wooing these thoughts to steal

					 					About the labyrinth in his soul of love.



				 					“What is there in thee. Moon! that thou shouldst move

					 					My heart so potently? When yet a child

					 					I oft have dried my tears when thou hast smiled.

					 					Thou seem’dst my sister: hand in hand we went

					 					From eve to morn across the firmament.

					 					No apples would I gather from the tree,

					 					Till thou hadst cool’d their cheeks deliciously:

					 					No tumbling water ever spake romance,

					 					But when my eyes with thine thereon could dance:

					 					No woods were green enough, no bower divine,

					 					Until thou liftedst up thine eyelids fine:

					 					In sowing-time ne’er would I dibble take,

					 					Or drop a seed, till thou wast wide awake;

					 					And, in the summer tide of blossoming,

					 					No one but thee hath heard me blithely sing

					 					And mesh my dewy flowers all the night.

					 					No melody was like a passing spright

					 					If it went not to solemnize thy reign.

					 					Yes, in my boyhood, every joy and pain

					 					By thee were fashion’d to the self-same end

					 					And as I grew in years, still didst thou blend

					 					With all my ardours; thou wast the deep glen:

					 					Thou wast the mountain-top⁠—the sage’s pen⁠—

					 					The poet’s harp⁠—the voice of friends⁠—the sun;

					 					Thou wast the river⁠—thou wast glory won;

					 					Thou wast my clarion’s blast⁠—thou wast my steed⁠—

					 					My goblet full of wine⁠—my topmost deed:⁠—

					 					Thou wast the charm of women, lovely Moon!

					 					O what a wild and harmonized tune

					 					My spirit struck from all the beautiful!

					 					On some bright essence could I lean, and lull

					 					Myself to immortality: I prest

					 					Nature’s soft pillow in a wakeful rest.

					 					But gentle Orb! there came a nearer bliss⁠—

					 					My strange love came⁠—Felicity’s abyss!

					 					She came, and thou didst fade, and fade away⁠—

					 					Yet not entirely: no, thy starry sway

					 					Has been an under-passion to this hour.

					 					Now I begin to feel thine orby power

					 					Is coming fresh upon me: O be kind,

					 					Keep back thine influence, and do not blind

					 					My sovereign vision.⁠—Dearest love, forgive

					 					That I can think away from thee and live!⁠—

					 					Pardon me, airy planet, that I prize

					 					One thought beyond thine argent luxuries!

					 					How far beyond!” At this a surprised start

					 					Frosted the springing verdure of his heart;

					 					For as he lifted up his eyes to swear

					 					How his own goddess was past all things fair,

					 					He saw far in the concave green of the sea

					 					An old man sitting calm and peacefully.

					 					Upon a weeded rock this old man sat,

					 					And his white hair was awful, and a mat

					 					Of weeds were cold beneath his cold thin feet;

					 					And, ample as the largest winding-sheet,

					 					A cloak of blue wrapp’d up his aged bones,

					 					O’erwrought with symbols by the deepest groans

					 					Of ambitious magic: every ocean-form

					 					Was woven in with black distinctness; storm,

					 					And calm, and whispering, and hideous roar,

					 					Quicksand, and whirlpool, and deserted shore

					 					Were emblem’d in the woof; with every shape

					 					That skims, or dives, or sleeps, ’twixt cape and cape.

					 					The gulphing whale was like a dot in the spell,

					 					Yet look upon it, and ’twould size and swell

					 					To its huge self; and the minutest fish

					 					Would pass the very hardest gazer’s wish,

					 					And show his little eye’s anatomy.

					 					Then there was pictured the regality

					 					Of Neptune; and the sea-nymphs round his state,

					 					In beauteous vassalage, look up and wait.

					 					Beside this old man lay a pearly wand,

					 					And in his lap a book, the which he conn’d

					 					So steadfastly, that the new denizen

					 					Had time to keep him in amazed ken,

					 					To mark these shadowings, and stand in awe.



				 					The old man raised his hoary head and saw

					 					The wilder’d stranger⁠—seeming not to see,

					 					His features were so lifeless. Suddenly

					 					He woke as from a trance: his snow-white brows

					 					Went arching up, and like two magic ploughs

					 					Furrow’d deep wrinkles in his forehead large,

					 					Which kept as fixedly as rocky marge,

					 					Till round his wither’d lips had gone a smile.

					 					Then up he rose, like one whose tedious toil

					 					Had watch’d for years in forlorn hermitage,

					 					Who had not from mid-life to utmost age

					 					Eased in one accent his o’erburden’d soul,

					 					Even to the trees. He rose: he grasp’d his stole,

					 					With convulsed clenches waving it abroad,

					 					And in a voice of solemn joy, that awed

					 					Echo into oblivion, he said:⁠—



				 					“Thou art the man! Now shall I lay my head

					 					In peace upon my watery pillow: now

					 					Sleep will come smoothly to my weary brow.

					 					O Jove! I shall be young again, be young!

					 					O shell-borne Neptune, I am pierced and stung

					 					With new-born life! What shall I do? Where go,

					 					When I have cast this serpent-skin of woe?⁠—

					 					I’ll swim to the sirens, and one moment listen

					 					Their melodies, and see their long hair glisten;

					 					Anon upon that giant’s arm I’ll be,

					 					That writhes about the roots of Sicily:

					 					To northern seas I’ll in a twinkling sail,

					 					And mount upon the snortings of a whale

					 					To some black cloud; thence down I’ll madly sweep

					 					On forked lightning, to the deepest deep,

					 					Where through some sucking pool I will be hurl’d

					 					With rapture to the other side of the world!

					 					O, I am full of gladness! Sisters three,

					 					I bow full-hearted to your old decree!

					 					Yes, every god be thank’d, and power benign,

					 					For I no more shall wither, droop, and pine.

					 					Thou art the man!” Endymion started back

					 					Dismay’d; and, like a wretch from whom the rack

					 					Tortures hot breath, and speech of agony,

					 					Mutter’d: “What lonely death am I to die

					 					In this cold region? Will he let me freeze,

					 					And float my brittle limbs o’er polar seas?

					 					Or will he touch me with his searing hand,

					 					And leave a black memorial on the sand?

					 					Or tear me piecemeal with a bony saw,

					 					And keep me as a chosen food to draw

					 					His magian fish through hated fire and flame?

					 					O misery of hell! resistless, tame,

					 					Am I to be burnt up? No, I will shout,

					 					Until the gods through heaven’s blue look out!⁠—

					 					O Tartarus! but some few days agone

					 					Her soft arms were entwining me, and on

					 					Her voice I hung like fruit among green leaves:

					 					Her lips were all my own, and⁠—ah, ripe sheaves

					 					Of happiness! ye on the stubble droop,

					 					But never may be garner’d. I must stoop

					 					My head, and kiss death’s foot. Love! love, farewell!

					 					Is there no hope from thee? This horrid spell

					 					Would melt at thy sweet breath.⁠—By Dian’s hind

					 					Feeding from her white fingers, on the wind

					 					I see thy streaming hair! and now, by Pan,

					 					I care not for this old mysterious man!”



				 					He spake, and walking to that aged form,

					 					Look’d high defiance. Lo! his heart ’gan warm

					 					With pity, for the gray-hair’d creature wept.

					 					Had he then wrong’d a heart where sorrow kept?

					 					Had he, though blindly contumelious, brought

					 					Rheum to kind eyes, a sting to human thought,

					 					Convulsion to a mouth of many years?

					 					He had in truth; and he was ripe for tears.

					 					The penitent shower fell, as down he knelt

					 					Before that care-worn sage, who trembling felt

					 					About his large dark locks, and faltering spake:



				 					“Arise, good youth, for sacred Phœbus’ sake!

					 					I know thine inmost bosom, and I feel

					 					A very brother’s yearning for thee steal

					 					Into mine own: for why? thou openest

					 					The prison gates that have so long opprest

					 					My weary watching. Though thou kuow’st it not,

					 					Thou art commission’d to this fated spot

					 					For great enfranchisement. O weep no more!

					 					I am a friend to love, to loves of yore:

					 					Aye, hadst thou never loved an unknown power,

					 					I had been grieving at this joyous hour.

					 					But even now most miserable old,

					 					I saw thee, and my blood no longer cold

					 					Gave mighty pulses: in this tottering case

					 					Grew a new heart, which at this moment plays

					 					As dancingly as thine. Be not afraid,

					 					For thou shalt hear this secret all display’d,

					 					Now as we speed towards our joyous task.”



				 					So saying, this young soul in age’s mask

					 					Went forward with the Carian side by side:

					 					Resuming quickly thus; while ocean’s tide

					 					Hung swollen at their backs, and jewell’d sands

					 					Took silently their foot-prints.



				 					“My soul stands

					 					Now past the midway from mortality,

					 					And so I can prepare without a sigh

					 					To tell thee briefly all my joy and pain.

					 					I was a fisher once, upon this main,

					 					And my boat danced in every creek and bay;

					 					Rough billows were my home by night and day⁠—

					 					The sea-gulls not more constant; for I had

					 					No housing from the storm and tempests mad,

					 					But hollow rocks⁠—and they were palaces

					 					Of silent happiness, of slumberous ease:

					 					Long years of misery have told me so.

					 					Aye, thus it was one thousand years ago.

					 					One thousand years!⁠—Is it then possible

					 					To look so plainly through them? to dispel

					 					A thousand years with backward glance sublime?

					 					To breathe away as ’twere all scummy slime

					 					From off a crystal pool, to see its deep,

					 					And one’s own image from the bottom peep?

					 					Yes: now I am no longer wretched thrall,

					 					My long captivity and moanings all

					 					Are but a slime, a thin-pervading scum,

					 					The which I breathe away, and thronging come

					 					Like things of yesterday my youthful pleasures:



				 					“I touch’d no lute, I sang not, trod no measures:

					 					I was a lonely youth on desert shores.

					 					My sports were lonely, ’mid continuous roars,

					 					And craggy isles, and sea-mew’s plaintive cry⁠—

					 					Plaining discrepant between sea and sky.

					 					Dolphins were still my playmates; shapes unseen

					 					Would let me feel their scales of gold and green,

					 					Nor be my desolation; and, full oft,

					 					When a dread waterspout had rear’d aloft

					 					Its hungry hugeness, seeming ready ripe

					 					To burst with hoarsest thunderings, and wipe

					 					My life away like a vast sponge of fate,

					 					Some friendly monster, pitying my sad state,

					 					Has dived to its foundations, gulf’d it down,

					 					And left me tossing safely. But the crown

					 					Of all my life was utmost quietude:

					 					More did I love to lie in cavern rude,

					 					Keeping in wait whole days for Neptune’s voice,

					 					And if it came at last, hark, and rejoice!

					 					There blush’d no summer eve but I would steer

					 					My skiff along green shelving coasts, to hear

					 					The shepherd’s pipe come clear from aery steep,

					 					Mingled with ceaseless bleatings of his sheep:

					 					And never was a day of summer shine,

					 					But I beheld its birth upon the brine:

					 					For I would watch all night to see unfold

					 					Heaven’s gates, and Æthon snort his morning gold

					 					Wide o’er the swelling streams: and constantly

					 					At brim of day-tide on some grassy lea,

					 					My nets would be spread out, and I at rest.

					 					The poor folk of the sea-country I blest

					 					With daily boon of fish most delicate:

					 					They knew not whence this bounty, and elate

					 					Would strew sweet flowers on a sterile beach.



				 					“Why was I not contented? Wherefore reach

					 					At things which, but for thee, O Latmian!

					 					Had been my dreary death? Fool! I began

					 					To feel distemper’d longings: to desire

					 					The utmost privilege that ocean’s sire

					 					Could grant in benediction: to be free

					 					Of all his kingdom. Long in misery

					 					I wasted, ere in one extremest fit

					 					I plunged for life or death. To interknit

					 					One’s senses with so dense a breathing stuff

					 					Might seem a work of pain; so not enough

					 					Can I admire how crystal-smooth it felt,

					 					And buoyant round my limbs. At first I dwelt

					 					Whole days and days in sheer astonishment;

					 					Forgetful utterly of self-intent;

					 					Moving but with the mighty ebb and flow.

					 					Then, like a new-fledged bird that flrst doth show

					 					His spreaded feathers to the morrow chill,

					 					I tried in fear the pinions of my will.

					 					’Twas freedom! and at once I visited

					 					The ceaseless wonders of this ocean-bed.

					 					No need to tell thee of them, for I see

					 					That thou hast been a witness⁠—it must be

					 					For these I know thou canst not feel a drouth,

					 					By the melancholy corners of that mouth.

					 					So I will in my story straightway pass

					 					To more immediate matter. Woe, alas!

					 					That love should be my bane! Ah, Scylla fair!

					 					Why did poor Glaucus ever⁠—ever dare

					 					To sue thee to his heart? Kind stranger-youth!

					 					I loved her to the very white of truth,

					 					And she would not conceive it. Timid thing!

					 					She fled me swift as sea-bird on the wing,

					 					Round every isle, and point, and promontory,

					 					From where large Hercules wound up his story

					 					Far as Egyptian Nile. My passion grew

					 					The more, the more I saw her dainty hue

					 					Gleam delicately through the azure clear:

					 					Until ’twas too fierce agony to bear;

					 					And in that agony, across my grief

					 					It flash’d, that Circe might find some relief⁠—

					 					Cruel enchantress! So above the water

					 					I rear’d my head, and look’d for Phœbus’ daughter.

					 					Ææa’s isle was wondering at the moon:⁠—

					 					It seem’d to whirl around me, and a swoon

					 					Left me dead-drifting to that fatal power.



				 					“When I awoke, ’twas in a twilight bower;

					 					Just when the light of morn, with hum of bees,

					 					Stole through its verdurous matting of fresh trees.

					 					How sweet, and sweeter! for I heard a lyre,

					 					And over it a sighing voice expire.

					 					It ceased⁠—I caught light footsteps; and anon

					 					The fairest face that morn e’er look’d upon

					 					Push’d through a screen of roses. Starry Jove!

					 					With tears, and smiles, and honey-words she wove

					 					A net whose thraldom was more bliss than all

					 					The range of flower’d Elysium. Thus did fall

					 					The dew of her rich speech: ‘Ah! art awake?

					 					O let me hear thee speak, for Cupid’s sake!

					 					I am so oppress’d with joy! Why, I have shed

					 					An urn of tears, as though thou wert cold dead;

					 					And now I find thee living, I will pour

					 					From these devoted eyes their silver store,

					 					Until exhausted of the latest drop,

					 					So it will pleasure thee, and force thee stop

					 					Here, that I too may live: but if beyond

					 					Such cool and sorrowful offerings, thou art fond

					 					Of soothing warmth, of dalliance supreme;

					 					If thou art ripe to taste a long love-dream;

					 					If smiles, if dimples, tongues for ardour mute,

					 					Hang in thy vision like a tempting fruit,

					 					O let me pluck it for thee!’ Thus she link’d

					 					Her charming syllables, till indistinct

					 					Their music came to my o’er-sweeten’d soul;

					 					And then she hover’d over me, and stole

					 					So near, that if no nearer it had been

					 					This furrow’d visage thou hadst never seen.



				 					“Young man of Latmos! thus particular

					 					Am I, that thou may’st plainly see how far

					 					This fierce temptation went: and thou may’st not

					 					Exclaim, How, then, was Scylla quite forgot?



				 					“Who could resist? Who in this universe?

					 					She did so breathe ambrosia; so immerse

					 					My fine existence in a golden clime.

					 					She took me like a child of suckling time,

					 					And cradled me in roses. Thus condemn’d,

					 					The current of my former life was stemm’d,

					 					And to this arbitrary queen of sense

					 					I bow’d a tranced vassal: nor would thence

					 					Have moved, even though Amphion’s harp had woo’d

					 					Me back to Scylla o’er the billows rude.

					 					For as Apollo each eve doth devise

					 					A new apparelling for western skies;

					 					So every eve, nay, every spendthrift hour

					 					Shed balmy consciousness within that bower.

					 					And I was free of haunts umbrageous;

					 					Could wander in the mazy forest-house

					 					Of squirrels, foxes shy, and antler’d deer,

					 					And birds from coverts innermost and drear

					 					Warbling for very joy mellifluous sorrow⁠—

					 					To me new-born delights!



				 					“Now let me borrow,

					 					For moments few, a temperament as stern

					 					As Pluto’s sceptre, that my words not burn

					 					These uttering lips, while I in calm speech tell

					 					How specious heaven was changed to real hell.



				 					“One morn she left me sleeping; half awake

					 					I sought for her smooth arms and lips, to slake

					 					My greedy thirst with nectarous camel-draughts;

					 					But she was gone. Whereat the barbed shafts

					 					Of disappointment stuck in me so sore,

					 					That out I ran and search’d the forest o’er.

					 					Wandering about in pine and cedar gloom

					 					Damp awe assail’d me; for there ’gan to boom

					 					A sound of moan, an agony of sound,

					 					Sepulchral from the distance all around.

					 					Then came a conquering earth-thunder, and rumbled

					 					That fierce complain to silence: while I stumbled

					 					Down a precipitous path, as if impell’d.

					 					I came to a dark valley.⁠—Groanings swell’d

					 					Poisonous about my ears, and louder grew,

					 					The nearer I approach’d a flame’s gaunt blue,

					 					That glared before me through a thorny brake.

					 					This fire, like the eye of gordian snake,

					 					Bewitch’d me towards; and I soon was near

					 					A sight too fearful for the feel of fear:

					 					In thicket hid I cursed the haggard scene⁠—

					 					The banquet of my arms, my arbour queen,

					 					Seated upon an uptorn forest root;

					 					And all around her shapes, wizard and brute,

					 					Laughing, and wailing, grovelling, serpenting,

					 					Showing tooth, tusk, and venom-bag, and sting!

					 					O such deformities! old Charon’s self,

					 					Should he give up awhile his penny pelf,

					 					And take a dream ’mong rushes Stygian,

					 					It could not be so fantasied. Fierce, wan,

					 					And tyrannizing was the lady’s look,

					 					As over them a gnarled staff she shook.

					 					Ofttimes upon the sudden she laugh’d out,

					 					And from a basket emptied to the rout

					 					Clusters of grapes, the which they raven’d quick

					 					And roar’d for more; with many a hungry lick

					 					About their shaggy jaws. Avenging, slow,

					 					Anon she took a branch of mistletoe,

					 					And emptied on ’t a black dull-gurgling phial:

					 					Groan’d one and all, as if some piercing trial

					 					Was sharpening for their pitiable bones.

					 					She lifted up the charm: appealing groans

					 					From their poor breasts went sueing to her ear

					 					In vain; remorseless as an infant’s bier

					 					She whisk’d against their eyes the sooty oil.

					 					Whereat was heard a noise of painful toil,

					 					Increasing gradual to a tempest rage,

					 					Shrieks, yells, and groans of torture-pilgrimage;

					 					Until their grieved bodies ’gan to bloat

					 					And puff from the tail’s end to stifled throat:

					 					Then was appalling silence: then a sight

					 					More wildering than all that hoarse affright;

					 					For the whole herd, as by a whirlwind writhen,

					 					Went through the dismal air like one huge Python

					 					Antagonizing Boreas,⁠—and so vanish’d.

					 					Yet there was not a breath of wind: she banish’d

					 					These phantoms with a nod. Lo! from the dark

					 					Came waggish fauns, and nymphs, and satyrs stark,

					 					With dancing and loud revelry,⁠—and went

					 					Swifter than centaurs after rapine bent.⁠—

					 					Sighing an elephant appear’d and bow’d

					 					Before the fierce witch, speaking thus aloud

					 					In human accent: ‘Potent goddess! chief

					 					Of pains resistless! make my being brief,

					 					Or let me from this heavy prison fly:

					 					Or give me to the air, or let me die!

					 					I sue not for my happy crown again;

					 					I sue not for my phalanx on the plain;

					 					I sue not for my lone, my widow’d wife:

					 					I sue not for my ruddy drops of life,

					 					My children fair, my lovely girls and boys!

					 					I will forget them; I will pass these joys;

					 					Ask nought so heavenward, so too⁠—too high:

					 					Only I pray, as fairest boon, to die,

					 					Or be deliver’d from this cumbrous flesh,

					 					From this gross, detestable, filthy mesh,

					 					And merely given to the cold bleak air.

					 					Have mercy. Goddess! Circe, feel my prayer!’



				 					“That curst magician’s name fell icy numb

					 					Upon my wild conjecturing: truth had come

					 					Naked and sabre-like against my heart.

					 					I saw a fury whetting a death-dart;

					 					And my slain spirit, overwrought with fright,

					 					Fainted away in that dark lair of night.

					 					Think, my deliverer, how desolate

					 					My waking must have been! disgust, and hate,

					 					And terrors manifold divided me

					 					A spoil amongst them. I prepared to flee

					 					Into the dungeon core of that wild wood:

					 					I fled three days⁠—when lo! before me stood

					 					Glaring the angry witch. O Dis, even now,

					 					A clammy dew is beading on my brow,

					 					At mere remembering her pale laugh, and curse.

					 					‘Ha! ha! Sir Dainty! there must be a nurse

					 					Made of rose-leaves and thistle-down, express,

					 					To cradle thee my sweet, and lull thee: yes,

					 					I am too flinty-hard for thy nice touch:

					 					My tenderest squeeze is but a giant’s clutch

					 					So, fairy-thing, it shall have lullabies

					 					Unheard of yet; and it shall still its cries

					 					Upon some breast more lily-feminine.

					 					Oh, no⁠—it shall not pine, and pine, and pine

					 					More than one pretty, trifling thousand years;

					 					And then ’twere pity, but fate’s gentle shears

					 					Cut short its immortality. Sea-flirt!

					 					Young dove of the waters! truly I’ll not hurt

					 					One hair of thine: see how I weep and sigh,

					 					That our heart-broken parting is so nigh.

					 					And must we part? Ah, yes, it must be so.

					 					Yet ere thou leavest me in utter woe,

					 					Let me sob over thee my last adieus,

					 					And speak a blessing: Mark me! thou hast thews

					 					Immortal, for thou art of heavenly race:

					 					But such a love is mine, that here I chase

					 					Eternally away from thee all bloom

					 					Of youth, and destine thee towards a tomb.

					 					Hence shalt thou quickly to the watery vast;

					 					And there, ere many days be overpast,

					 					Disabled age shall seize thee; and even then

					 					Thou shalt not go the way of aged men;

					 					But live and wither, cripple and still breathe

					 					Ten hundred years: which gone, I then bequeath

					 					Thy fragile bones to unknown burial.

					 					Adieu, sweet love, adieu!’⁠—As shot stars fall,

					 					She fled ere I could groan for mercy. Stung

					 					And poisoned was my spirit: despair sung

					 					A war-song of defiance ’gainst all hell.

					 					A hand was at my shoulder to compel

					 					My sullen steps; another ’fore my eyes

					 					Moved on with pointed finger. In this guise

					 					Enforced, at the last by ocean’s foam

					 					I found me; by my fresh, my native home.

					 					Its tempering coolness, to my life akin,

					 					Came salutary as I waded in;

					 					And with a blind voluptuous rage, I gave

					 					Battle to the swollen billow-ridge, and drave

					 					Large froth before me, while yet there remain’d

					 					Hale strength, nor from my bones all marrow drain’d.



				 					“Young lover, I must weep⁠—such hellish spite

					 					With dry cheek who can tell? While thus my might

					 					Proving upon this element, dismay’d,

					 					Upon a dead thing’s face my hand I laid;

					 					I look’d⁠—’twas Scylla! Cursed, cursed Circe!

					 					O vulture-witch, hast never heard of mercy?

					 					Could not thy harshest vengeance be content,

					 					But thou must nip this tender innocent

					 					Because I lov’d her?⁠—Cold, O cold indeed

					 					Were her fair limbs, and like a common weed

					 					The sea-swell took her hair. Dead as she was

					 					I clung about her waist, nor ceased to pass

					 					Fleet as an arrow through unfathom’d brine,

					 					Until there shone a fabric crystalline,

					 					Ribb’d and inlaid with coral, pebble, and pearl.

					 					Headlong I darted: at one eager swirl

					 					Gain’d its bright portal, enter’d, and behold!

					 					’Twas vast, and desolate, and icy-cold;

					 					And all around⁠—But wherefore this to thee

					 					Who in few minutes more thyself shalt see?⁠—

					 					I left poor Scylla in a niche and fled.

					 					My fever’d parchings up, my scathing dread

					 					Met palsy half way: soon these limbs became

					 					Gaunt, wither’d, sapless, feeble, cramp’d, and lame.



				 					“Now let me pass a cruel, cruel space,

					 					Without one hope, without one faintest trace

					 					Of mitigation, or redeeming bubble

					 					Of colour’d phantasy: for I fear ’twould trouble

					 					Thy brain to loss of reason: and next tell

					 					How a restoring chance came down to quell

					 					One half of the witch in me.



				 					“On a day,

					 					Sitting upon a rock above the spray,

					 					I saw grow up from the horizon’s brink

					 					A gallant vessel: soon she seem’d to sink

					 					Away from me again, as though her course

					 					Had been resumed in spite of hindering force⁠—

					 					So vanish’d: and not long, before arose

					 					Dark clouds, and muttering of winds morose.

					 					Old Æolus would stifle his mad spleen,

					 					But could not; therefore, all the billows green

					 					Toss’d up the silver spume against the clouds.

					 					The tempest came: I saw that vessel’s shrouds

					 					In perilous bustle; while upon the deck

					 					Stood trembling creatures. I beheld the wreck;

					 					The final gulfing; the poor struggling souls;

					 					I heard their cries amid loud thunder-rolls.

					 					O they had all been saved but crazed eld

					 					Annull’d my vigorous cravings; and thus quell’d

					 					And curb’d, think on ’t, O Latmian! did I sit

					 					Writhing with pity, and a cursing fit

					 					Against that hell-born Circe. The crew had gone

					 					By one and one, to pale oblivion;

					 					And I was gazing on the surges prone,

					 					With many a scalding tear, and many a groan,

					 					When at my feet emerged an old man’s hand,

					 					Grasping this scroll, and this same slender wand.

					 					I knelt with pain⁠—reach’d out my hand⁠—had grasp’d

					 					These treasures⁠—touch’d the knuckles⁠—they un-clasp’d⁠—

					 					I caught a finger; but the downward weight

					 					O’erpower’d me⁠—it sank. Then ’gan abate

					 					The storm, and through chill aguish gloom outburst

					 					The comfortable sun. I was athirst

					 					To search the book, and in the warming air

					 					Parted its dripping leaves with eager care.

					 					Strange matters did it treat of, and drew on

					 					My soul page after page, till well nigh won

					 					Into forgetfulness; when, stupefied,

					 					I read these words, and read again, and tried

					 					My eyes against the heavens, and read again.

					 					O what a load of misery and pain

					 					Each Atlas-line bore off!⁠—a shine of hope

					 					Came gold around me, cheering me to cope

					 					Strenuous with hellish tyranny. Attend!

					 					For thou hast brought their promise to an end.”



				 					In the wide sea there lives a forlorn wretch,

					 					Doom’d with enfeebled carcase to outstretch

					 					His loath’d existence through ten centuries,

					 					And then to die alone. Who can devise

					 					A total opposition? No one. So

					 					One million times ocean must ebb and flow,

					 					And he oppressed. Yet he shall not die,

					 					These things accomplish’d:⁠—If he utterly

					 					Scans all the depths of magic, and expounds

					 					The meanings of all motions, shapes, and sounds;

					 					If he explores all forms and substances

					 					Straight homeward to their symbol-essences;

					 					He shall not die. Moreover, and in chief,

					 					He must pursue this task of joy and grief

					 					Most piously;⁠—all lovers tempest-tost,

					 					And in the savage overtchelming lost,

					 					He shall deposit side by side, until

					 					Time’s creeping shall the dreary space fulfil:

					 					Which done, and all these labours ripened,

					 					A youth, by heavenly power loved and led,

					 					Shall stand before him; whom he shall direct

					 					How to consummate all. The youth elect

					 					Must do the thing, or both will be destroyed.⁠—



				 					“Then,” cried the young Endymion, overjoy’d,

					 					“We are twin brothers in this destiny!

					 					Say, I entreat thee, what achievement high

					 					Is, in this restless world, for me reserved.

					 					What! if from thee my wandering feet had swerved,

					 					Had we both perish’d?”⁠—“Look!” the sage replied,

					 					“Dost thou not mark a gleaming through the tide,

					 					Of divers brilliances? ’tis the edifice

					 					I told thee of, where lovely Scylla lies;

					 					And where I have enshrined piously

					 					All lovers, whom fell storms have doom’d to die

					 					Throughout my bondage.” Thus discoursing, on

					 					They went till unobscured the porches shone;

					 					Which hurryingly they gain’d, and enter’d straight.

					 					Sure never since king Neptune held his state

					 					Was seen such wonder underneath the stars.

					 					Turn to some level plain where haughty Mars

					 					Has legion’d all his battle; and behold

					 					How every soldier, with firm foot, doth hold

					 					His even breast: see, many steeled squares,

					 					And rigid ranks of iron⁠—whence who dares

					 					One step? Imagine further, line by line,

					 					These warrior thousands on the field supine;⁠—

					 					So in that crystal place, in silent rows,

					 					Poor lovers lay at rest from joys and woes.⁠—

					 					The stranger from the mountains, breathless, traced

					 					Such thousands of shut eyes in order placed;

					 					Such ranges of white feet, and patient lips

					 					All ruddy,⁠—for here death no blossom nips,

					 					He mark’d their brows and foreheads; saw their hair

					 					Put sleekly on one side with nicest care;

					 					And each one’s gentle wrists, with reverence,

					 					Put cross-wise to its heart.



				 					“Let us commence,”

					 					Whisper’d the guide, stuttering with joy, “even now.”

					 					He spake, and, trembling like an aspen-bough,

					 					Began to tear his scroll in pieces small,

					 					Uttering the while some mumblings funeral.

					 					He tore it into pieces small as snow

					 					That drifts unfeather’d when bleak northerns blow;

					 					And having done it, took his dark blue cloak

					 					And bound it round Endymion: then struck

					 					His wand against the empty air times nine.⁠—

					 					“What more there is to do, young man, is thine:

					 					But first a little patience; first undo

					 					This tangled thread, and wind it to a clue.

					 					Ah, gentle! ’tis as weak as spider’s skein;

					 					And shouldst thou break it⁠—What, is it done so clean?

					 					A power overshadows thee! Oh, brave!

					 					The spite of hell is tumbling to its grave.

					 					Here is a shell; ’tis pearly blank to me,

					 					Nor mark’d with any sign or charactery⁠—

					 					Canst thou read aught? O read for pity’s sake!

					 					Olympus! we are safe! Now, Carian, break

					 					This wand against yon lyre on the pedestal.”



				 					’Twas done: and straight with sudden swell and fall

					 					Sweet music breathed her soul away, and sigh’d

					 					A lullaby to silence.⁠—“Youth! now strew

					 					These minced leaves on me, and passing through

					 					Those files of dead, scatter the same around,

					 					And thou wilt see the issue.”⁠—’Mid the sound

					 					Of flutes and viols, ravishing his heart,

					 					Endymion from Glaucus stood apart,

					 					And scatter’d in his face some fragments light.

					 					How lightning-swift the change! a youthful wight

					 					Smiling beneath a coral diadem,

					 					Out-sparkling sudden like an upturn’d gem,

					 					Appear’d, and, stepping to a beauteous corse,

					 					Kneel’d down beside it, and with tenderest force

					 					Press’d its cold hand, and wept,⁠—and Scylla sigh’d!

					 					Endymion, with quick hand, the charm applied⁠—

					 					The nymph arose: he left them to their joy,

					 					And onward went upon his high employ,

					 					Showering those powerful fragments on the dead.

					 					And, as he pass’d, each lifted up its head,

					 					As doth a flower at Apollo’s touch.

					 					Death felt it to his inwards: ’twas too much:

					 					Death fell a-weeping in his charnel-house.

					 					The Latmian persevered along, and thus

					 					All were reanimated. There arose

					 					A noise of harmony, pulses and throes

					 					Of gladness in the air⁠—while many, who

					 					Had died in mutual arms devout and true,

					 					Sprang to each other madly; and the rest

					 					Felt a high certainty of being blest.

					 					They gazed upon Endymion. Enchantment

					 					Grew drunken, and would have its head and bent.

					 					Delicious symphonies, like airy flowers,

					 					Budded, and swell’d, and, full-blown, shed full showers

					 					Of light, soft, unseen leaves of sounds divine.

					 					The two deliverers tasted a pure wine

					 					Of happiness, from fairy press oozed out.

					 					Speechless they eyed each other, and about

					 					The fair assembly wandered to and fro,

					 					Distracted with the richest overflow

					 					Of joy that ever pour’d from heav’n.



				 					—“Away!”

					 					Shouted the new born god; “Follow, and pay

					 					Our piety to Neptunus supreme!”⁠—

					 					Then Scylla, blushing sweetly from her dream,

					 					They led on first, bent to her meek surprise,

					 					Through portal columns of a giant size

					 					Into the vaulted, boundless emerald.

					 					Joyous all follow’d, as the leader call’d,

					 					Down marble steps; pouring as easily

					 					As hour-glass sand⁠—and fast, as you might see

					 					Swallows obeying the south summer’s call,

					 					Or swans upon a gentle waterfall.



				 					Thus went that beautiful multitude, nor far,

					 					Ere from among some rocks of glittering spar,

					 					Just within ken, they saw descending thick

					 					Another multitude. Whereat more quick

					 					Moved either host. On a wide sand they met,

					 					And of those numbers every eye was wet;

					 					For each their old love found. A murmuring rose,

					 					Like what was never heard in all the throes

					 					Of wind and waters: ’tis past human wit

					 					To tell; ’tis dizziness to think of it.



				 					This mighty consummation made, the host

					 					Moved on for many a league; and gain’d and lost

					 					Huge sea-marks; vanward swelling in array,

					 					And from the rear diminishing away,⁠—

					 					Till a faint dawn surprised them. Glaucus cried,

					 					“Behold! behold, the palace of his pride!

					 					God Neptune’s palaces.” With noise increased,

					 					They shoulder’d on towards that brightening east.

					 					At every onward step proud domes arose

					 					In prospect,⁠—diamond gleams and golden glows

					 					Of amber ’gainst their faces levelling.

					 					Joyous, and many as the leaves in spring,

					 					Still onward; still the splendour gradual swell’d.

					 					Rich opal domes were seen, on high upheld

					 					By jasper pillars, letting through their shafts

					 					A blush of coral. Copious wonder-draughts

					 					Each gazer drank; and deeper drank more near:

					 					For what poor mortals fragment up, as mere

					 					As marble was there lavish, to the vast

					 					Of one fair palace, that far, far surpass’d,

					 					Even for common bulk, those olden three,

					 					Memphis, and Babylon, and Nineveh.



				 					As large, as bright, as colour’d as the bow

					 					Of Iris, when unfading it doth show

					 					Beyond a silvery shower, was the arch

					 					Through which this Paphian army took its march,

					 					Into the outer courts of Neptune’s state:

					 					Whence could be seen, direct, a golden gate,

					 					To which the leaders sped; but not half raught

					 					Ere it burst open swift as fairy thought,

					 					And made those dazzled thousands veil their eyes

					 					Like callow eagles at the first sunrise.

					 					Soon with an eagle nativeness their gaze

					 					Ripe from hue-golden swoons took all the blaze,

					 					And then, behold! large Neptune on his throne

					 					Of emerald deep: yet not exalt alone;

					 					At his right hand stood winged Love, and on

					 					His left sat smiling Beauty’s paragon.



				 					Far as the mariner on highest mast

					 					Can see all round upon the calmed vast,

					 					So wide was Neptune’s hall: and as the blue

					 					Doth vault the waters, so the waters drew

					 					Their doming curtains, high, magnificent,

					 					Awed from the throne aloof;⁠—and when storm rent

					 					Disclosed the thunder-gloomings in Jove’s air;

					 					But soothed as now, flash’d sudden everywhere,

					 					Noiseless, sub-marine cloudlets, glittering

					 					Death to a human eye: for there did spring

					 					From natural west, and east, and south, and north,

					 					A light as of four sunsets, blazing forth

					 					A gold-green zenith ’bove the Sea-God’s head.

					 					Of lucid depth the floor, and far outspread

					 					As breezeless lake, on which the slim canoe

					 					Of feather’d Indian darts about, as through

					 					The delicatest air: air verily,

					 					But for the portraiture of clouds and sky:

					 					This palace floor breath-air,⁠—but for the amaze

					 					Of deep-seen wonders motionless,⁠—and blaze

					 					Of the dome pomp, reflected in extremes,

					 					Globing a golden sphere.



				 					They stood in dreams

					 					Till Triton blew his horn. The palace rang;

					 					The Nereids danced; the Sirens faintly sang;

					 					And the great Sea-King bow’d his dripping head.

					 					Then Love took wing, and from his pinions shed

					 					On all the multitude a nectarous dew.

					 					The ooze-born Goddess beckoned and drew

					 					Fair Scylla and her guides to conference;

					 					And when they reach’d the throned eminence

					 					She kiss’d the sea-nymph’s cheek,⁠—who sat her down

					 					A-toying with the doves. Then,⁠—“Mighty crown

					 					And sceptre of this kingdom!” Venus said,

					 					“Thy vows were on a time to Nais paid:

					 					Behold!”⁠—Two copious tear-drops instant fell

					 					From the God’s large eyes; he smiled delectable.

					 					And over Glaucus held his blessing hands.⁠—

					 					“Endymion! Ah! still wandering in the bands

					 					Of love? Now this is cruel. Since the hour

					 					I met thee in earth’s bosom, all my power

					 					Have I put forth to serve thee. What, not yet

					 					Escaped from dull mortality’s harsh net?

					 					A little patience, youth! ’twill not be long,

					 					Or I am skilless quite: an idle tongue,

					 					A humid eye, and steps luxurious,

					 					Where these are new and strange, are ominous.

					 					Aye, I have seen these signs in one of heaven,

					 					When others were all blind; and were I given

					 					To utter secrets, haply I might say

					 					Some pleasant words:⁠—but Love will have his day.

					 					So wait awhile expectant. Pr’ythee soon,

					 					Even in the passing of thine honey-moon,

					 					Visit thou my Cytherea: thon wilt find

					 					Cupid well-natured, my Adonis kind;

					 					And pray persuade with thee⁠—Ah, I have done,

					 					All blisses be upon thee, my sweet son!”⁠—

					 					Thus the fair goddess: while Endymion

					 					Knelt to receive those accents halcyon.



				 					Meantime a glorious revelry began

					 					Before the water-monarch. Nectar ran

					 					In courteous fountains to all cups out-reach’d;

					 					And plunder’d vines, teeming exhaustless, pleach’d

					 					New growth about each shell and pendent lyre;

					 					The which, in disentangling for their fire,

					 					Pull’d down fresh foliage and coverture

					 					For dainty toying. Cupid, empire-sure,

					 					Flutter’d and laugh’d, and oft-times through the throng

					 					Made a delighted way. Then dance, and song,

					 					And garlanding, grew wild; and pleasure reign’d.

					 					In harmless tendril they each other chain’d,

					 					And strove who should be smother’d deepest in

					 					Fresh crush of leaves.



				 					O ’tis a very sin

					 					For one so weak to venture his poor verse

					 					In such a place as this. O do not curse,

					 					High Muses! let him hurry to the ending.



				 					All suddenly were silent. A soft blending

					 					Of dulcet instruments came charmingly;

					 					And then a hymn.



				 					“King of the stormy sea!

					 					Brother of Jove, and co-inheritor

					 					Of elements! Eternally before

					 					Thee the waves awful bow. Fast, stubborn rock,

					 					At thy fear’d trident shrinking, doth unlock

					 					Its deep foundations, hissing into foam.

					 					All mountain-rivers, lost in the wide home

					 					Of thy capacious bosom, ever flow.

					 					Thou frownest, and old Æolus thy foe

					 					Skulks to his cavern, ’mid the gruff complaint

					 					Of all his rebel tempests. Dark clouds faint

					 					When, from thy diadem, a silver gleam

					 					Slants over blue dominion. Thy bright team

					 					Gulfs in the morning light, and scuds along

					 					To bring thee nearer to that golden song

					 					Apollo singeth, while his chariot

					 					Waits at the doors of heaven. Thou art not

					 					For scenes like this: an empire stern hast thou;

					 					And it hath furrow’d that large front: yet now,

					 					As newly come of heaven, dost thou sit

					 					To blend and interknit

					 					Subdued majesty with this glad time.

					 					O shell-borne King sublime!

					 					We lay our hearts before thee evermore⁠—

					 					We sing, and we adore!



				 					“Breathe softly, flutes;

					 					Be tender of your strings, ye soothing lutes;

					 					Nor be the trumpet heard! O vain, O vain;

					 					Not flowers budding in an April rain,

					 					Nor breath of sleeping dove, nor river’s flow,⁠—

					 					No, nor the Æolian twang of Love’s own bow,

					 					Can mingle music fit for the soft ear

					 					Of goddess Cytherea!

					 					Yet deign, white Queen of Beauty, thy fair eyes

					 					On our soul’s sacrifice.



				 					“Bright-winged Child!

					 					Who has another care when thou hast smiled?

					 					Unfortunates on earth, we see at last

					 					All death-shadows, and glooms that overcast

					 					Our spirits, fann’d away by thy light pinions.

					 					O sweetest essence! sweetest of all minions!

					 					God of warm pulses, and dishevell’d hair,

					 					And panting bosoms bare!

					 					Dear unseen light in darkness! eclipser

					 					Of light in light! delicious poisoner!

					 					Thy venom’d goblet will we quaff until

					 					We fill⁠—we fill!

					 					And by thy Mother’s lips⁠—”



				 					Was heard no more

					 					For clamour, when the golden palace door

					 					Open’d again, and from without, in shone

					 					A new magnificence. On oozy throne

					 					Smooth-moving came Oceanus the old,

					 					To take a latest glimpse at his sheepfold,

					 					Before he went into his quiet cave

					 					To muse for ever⁠—Then a lucid wave,

					 					Scoop’d from its trembling sisters of mid-sea,

					 					Afloat, and pillowing up the majesty

					 					Of Doris, and the Ægean seer, her spouse⁠—

					 					Next, on a dolphin, clad in laurel boughs,

					 					Theban Amphion leaning on his lute:

					 					His fingers went across it⁠—All were mute

					 					To gaze on Amphitrite, queen of pearls,

					 					And Thetis pearly too.⁠—



				 					The palace whirls

					 					Around giddy Endymion; seeing he

					 					Was there far strayed from mortality.

					 					He could not bear it⁠—shut his eyes in vain;

					 					Imagination gave a dizzier pain.

					 					“O I shall die! sweet Venus, be my stay!

					 					Where is my lovely mistress? Wellaway!

					 					I die⁠—I hear her voice⁠—I feel my wing”⁠—

					 					At Neptune’s feet he sank. A sudden ring’⁠—

					 					Of Nereids were about him, in kind strife

					 					To usher back his spirit into life:

					 					But still he slept. At last they interwove

					 					Their cradling arms, and purposed to convey

					 					Towards a crystal bower far away.



				 					Lo! while slow carried through the pitying crowd,

					 					To his inward senses these words spake aloud;

					 					Written in starlight on the dark above:

					 					“Dearest Endymion! my entire love!

					 					 						How have I dwelt in fear of fate; ’tis done⁠—

					 					 						Immortal bliss for me too hast thou won.

					 					 						Arise then! for the hen-dove shall not hatch

					 					 						Her ready eggs, before I’ll kissing snatch

					 					Thee into endless heaven. Awake! awake!”



				 					The youth at once arose: a placid lake

					 					Came quiet to his eyes; and forest green,

					 					Cooler than all the wonders he had seen,

					 					Lull’d with its simple song his fluttering breast.

					 					How happy once again in grassy nest!





IV


				 					Muse of my native land! loftiest Muse!

					 					O first-born on the mountains! by the hues

					 					Of heaven on the spiritual air begot:

					 					Long didst thou sit alone in northern grot,

					 					While yet our England was a wolfish den;

					 					Before our forests heard the talk of men;

					 					Before the first of Druids was a child:⁠—

					 					Long didst thou sit amid our regions wild,

					 					Rapt in a deep prophetic solitude.

					 					There came an eastern voice of solemn mood:⁠—

					 					Yet wast thou patient. Then sang forth the Nine,

					 					Apollo’s garland:⁠—yet didst thou divine

					 					Such home-bred glory, that they cried in vain,

					 					“Come hither, Sister of the Island!” Plain

					 					Spake fair Ausonia; and once more she spake

					 					A higher summons:⁠—still didst thou betake

					Thee to thy native hopes. O thou hast won

					 					A full accomplishment! The thing is done,

					 					Which undone, these our latter days had risen

					 					On barren souls. Great Muse, thou know’st what prison

					 					Of flesh and bone, curbs, and confines, and frets

					 					Our spirits’ wings: despondency besets

					 					Our pillows; and the fresh to-morrow morn

					 					Seems to give forth its light in very scorn

					 					Of our dull, uninspired, snail-paced lives.

					 					Long have I said, how happy he who shrives

					 					To thee! But then I thought on poets gone,

					 					And could not pray:⁠—nor can I now⁠—so on

					 					I move to the end in lowliness of heart.⁠—



				 					“Ah, woe is me! that I should fondly part

					 					From my dear native land! Ah, foolish maid!

					 					Glad was the hour, when, with thee, myriads bade

					 					Adieu to Ganges and their pleasant fields!

					 					To one so friendless the clear freshet yields

					 					A bitter coolness; the ripe grape is sour:

					 					Yet I would have, great gods! but one short hour

					 					Of native air⁠—let me but die at home.”



				 					Endymion to heaven’s airy dome

					 					Was offering up a hecatomb of vows,

					 					When these words reach’d him. Whereupon he bows

					 					His head through thorny-green entanglement

					 					Of underwood, and to the sound is bent,

					 					Anxious as hind towards her hidden fawn.



				 					“Is no one near to help me? No fair dawn

					 					Of life from charitable voice? No sweet saying

					 					To set my dull and sadden’d spirit playing?

					 					No hand to toy with mine? No lips so sweet

					 					That I may worship them? No eyelids meet

					 					To twinkle on my bosom? No one dies

					 					Before me, till from these enslaving eyes

					 					Redemption sparkles!⁠—I am sad and lost.”



				 					Thou, Carian lord, hadst better have been tost

					 					Into a whirlpool. Vanish into air,

					 					Warm mountaineer! for canst thou only bear

					 					A woman’s sigh alone and in distress?

					 					See not her charms! Is Phœbe passionless?

					 					Phœbe is fairer far⁠—O gaze no more:⁠—

					 					Yet if thou wilt behold all beauty’s store,

					 					Behold her panting in the forest grass!

					 					Do not those curls of glossy jet surpass

					 					For tenderness the arms so idly lain

					 					Amongst them? Feelest not a kindred pain,

					 					To see such lovely eyes in swimming search

					 					After some warm delight, that seems to perch

					 					Dovelike in the dim cell lying beyond

					 					Their upper lids?⁠—Hist!



				 					“O for Hermes’ wand,

					 					To touch this flower into human shape!

					 					That woodland Hyacinthus could escape

					 					From his green prison, and here kneeling down

					 					Call me his queen, his second life’s fair crown!

					 					Ah me, how I could love!⁠—My soul doth melt

					 					For the unhappy youth⁠—Love! I have felt

					 					So faint a kindness, such a meek surrender

					 					To what my own full thoughts had made too tender,

					 					That but for tears my life had fled away!

					 					Ye deaf and senseless minutes of the day,

					 					And thou, old forest, hold ye this for true,

					 					There is no lightning, no authentic dew

					 					But in the eye of love: there’s not a sound,

					 					Melodious howsoever, can confound

					 					The heavens and earth in one to such a death

					 					As doth the voice of love: there’s not a breath

					 					Will mingle kindly with the meadow air,

					 					Till it has panted round, and stolen a share

					 					Of passion from the heart!”⁠—



				 					Upon a bough

					 					He leant, wretched. He surely cannot now

					 					Thirst for another love: O impious,

					 					That he can even dream upon it thus!⁠—

					 					Thought he, “Why am I not as are the dead,

					 					Since to a woe like this I have been led

					 					Through the dark earth, and through the wondrous sea?

					 					Goddess! I love thee not the less: from thee

					 					By Juno’s smile I turn not⁠—no, no, no⁠—

					 					While the great waters are at ebb and flow.⁠—

					 					I have a triple soul! O fond pretence⁠—

					 					For both, for both my love is so immense,

					 					I feel my heart is cut for them in twain.”



				 					And so he groan’d, as one by beauty slain.

					 					The lady’s heart beat quick, and he could see

					 					Her gentle bosom heave tumultuously.

					 					He sprang from his green covert: there she lay,

					 					Sweet as a musk-rose upon new-made hay;

					 					With all her limbs on tremble, and her eyes

					 					Shut softly up alive. To speak he tries:

					 					“Fair damsel, pity me! forgive that I

					 					Thus violate thy bower’s sanctity!

					 					O pardon me, for I am full of grief⁠—

					 					Grief born of thee, young angel! fairest thief!

					 					Who stolen hast away the wings wherewith

					 					I was to top the heavens. Dear maid, sith

					 					Thou art my executioner, and I feel

					 					Loving and hatred, misery and weal,

					 					Will in a few short hours be nothing to me,

					 					And all my story that much passion slew me;

					 					Do smile upon the evening of my days;

					 					And, for my tortured brain begins to craze,

					 					Be thou my nurse; and let me understand

					 					How dying I shall kiss that lily hand.⁠—

					 					Dost weep for me? Then should I be content.

					 					Scowl on, ye fates! until the firmament

					 					Outblackens Erebus, and the full-cavern’d earth

					 					Crumbles into itself. By the cloud-girth

					 					Of Jove, those tears have given me a thirst

					 					To meet oblivion.”⁠—As her heart would burst

					 					The maiden sobb’d awhile, and then replied:

					 					“Why must such desolation betide

					 					As that thou speakest of? Are not these green nooks

					 					Empty of all misfortune? Do the brooks

					 					Utter a gorgon voice? Does yonder thrush,

					 					Schooling its half-fledged little ones to brush

					 					About the dewy forest, whisper tales?⁠—

					 					Speak not of grief, young stranger, or cold snails

					 					Will slime the rose to-night. Though if thou wilt,

					 					Methinks ’twould be a guilt⁠—a very guilt⁠—

					 					Not to companion thee, and sigh away

					 					The light⁠—the dusk⁠—the dark⁠—till break of day!”

					 					“Dear lady,” said Endymion, “ ’tis past:

					 					I love thee! and my days can never last.

					 					That I may pass in patience still speak:

					 					Let me have music dying, and I seek

					 					No more delight⁠—I bid adieu to all.

					 					Didst thou not after other climates call,

					 					And murmur about Indian streams?”⁠—Then she,

					 					Sitting beneath the midmost forest tree,

					 					For pity sang this roundelay⁠⸺⁠



				 					“O Sorrow,

					 					Why dost borrow

					 					The natural hue of health, from vermeil lips?⁠—

					 					To give maiden blushes

					 					To the white rose bushes?

					 					Or is’t thy dewy hand the daisy tips?



				 					“O Sorrow,

					 					Why dost borrow

					 					The lustrous passion from a falcon-eye?⁠—

					 					To give the glowworm light?

					 					Or, on a moonless night,

					 					To tinge, on siren shores, the salt sea-spry?



				 					“O Sorrow,

					 					Why dost borrow

					 					The mellow ditties from a mourning tongue?⁠—

					 					To give at evening pale

					 					Unto the nightingale,

					 					That thou mayst listen the cold dews among?



				 					“O Sorrow,

					 					Why dost borrow

					 					Heart’s lightness from the merriment of May?⁠—

					 					A lover would not tread

					 					A cowslip on the head,

					 					Though he should dance from eve till peep of day⁠—

					 					Nor any drooping flower

					 					Held sacred for thy bower,

					 					Wherever he may sport himself and play.



				 					“To Sorrow,

					 					I bade good morrow,

					 					And thought to leave her far away behind;

					 					But cheerly, cheerly,

					 					She loves me dearly;

					 					She is so constant to me, and so kind;

					 					I would deceive her,

					 					And so leave her,

					 					But ah! she is so constant and so kind.



				 					“Beneath my palm-trees, by the river side

					 					I sat a-weeping: in the whole world wide

					 					There was no one to ask me why I wept,⁠—

					 					And so I kept

					 					Brimming the water-lily cups with tears

					 					Cold as my fears.



				 					“Beneath my palm-trees, by the river side,

					 					I sat a-weeping: what enamour’d bride,

					 					Cheated by shadowy wooer from the clouds,

					 					But hides and shrouds

					 					Beneath dark palm-trees by a river side?



				 					“And as I sat, over the light blue hills

					 					There came a noise of revellers: the rills

					 					Into the wide stream came of purple hue⁠—

					 					’Twas Bacchus and his crew!

					 					The earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrills

					 					From kissing cymbals made a merry din⁠—

					 					’Twas Bacchus and his kin!



				 					Like to a moving vintage down they came,

					 					Crown’d with green leaves, and faces all on flame;

					 					All madly dancing through the pleasant valley,

					 					To scare thee, Melancholy!

					 					O then, O then, thou wast a simple name!

					 					And I forgot thee, as the berried holly

					 					By shepherds is forgotten, when, in June,

					 					Tall chestnuts keep away the sun and moon:⁠—

					 					I rush’d into the folly!



				 					“Within his car, aloft, young Bacchus stood,

					 					Trifling his ivy-dart, in dancing mood,

					 					With sidelong laughing;

					 					And little rills of crimson wine imbrued

					 					His plump white arms, and shoulders, enough white

					 					For Venus’ pearly bite;

					 					And near him rode Silenus on his ass,

					 					Pelted with flowers as he on did pass

					 					Tipsily quaffing.



				 					“Whence came ye, merry Damsels! whence came ye!

					 					So many, and so many, and such glee?

					 					Why have ye left your bowers desolate,

					 					Your lutes, and gentler fate?

					 					‘We follow Bacchus! Bacchus on the wing,

					 					A conquering!

					 					Bacchus, young Bacchus! good or ill betide,

					 					We dance before him thorough kingdoms wide:⁠—

					 					Come hither, lady fair, and joined be

					 					To our wild minstrelsy!’



				 					“Whence came ye, jolly Satyrs! whence came ye,

					 					So many, and so many, and such glee?

					 					Why have ye left your forest haunts, why left

					 					Your nuts in oak-tree cleft?⁠—



				 					‘For wine, for wine we left our kernel tree;

					 					For wine we left our heath, and yellow brooms,

					 					And cold mushrooms;

					 					For wine we follow Bacchus through the earth;

					 					Great god of breathless cups and chirping mirth!⁠—

					 					Come hither, lady fair, and joined be

					 					To our mad minstrelsy!’



				 					“Over wide streams and mountains great we went,

					 					And, save when Bacchus kept his ivy tent,

					 					Onward the tiger and the leopard pants,

					 					With Asian elephants:

					 					Onward these myriads⁠—with song and dance,

					 					With zebras striped, and sleek Arabians’ prance,

					 					Web-footed alligators, crocodiles,

					 					Bearing upon their scaly backs, in files,

					 					Plump infant laughers mimicking the coil

					 					Of seamen, and stout galley-rowers’ toil:

					 					With toying oars and silken sails they glide,

					 					Nor care for wind and tide.



				 					“Mounted on panthers’ furs and lions’ manes,

					 					From rear to van they scour about the plains;

					 					A three days’ journey in a moment done;

					 					And always, at the rising of the sun,

					 					About the wilds they hunt with spear and horn,

					 					On spleenful unicorn.



				 					“I saw Osirian Egypt kneel adown

					 					Before the vine-wreath crown!

					 					I saw parch’d Abyssinia rouse and sing

					 					To the silver cymbals’ ring!

					 					I saw the whelming vintage hotly pierce

					 					Old Tartary the fierce!

					 					The Kings of Inde their jewel-sceptres vail,

					 					And from their treasures scatter pearled hail;

					 					Great Brahma from his mystic heaven groans,

					 					And all his priesthood moans;

					 					Before young Bacchus’ eye-wink turning pale,⁠—

					 					Into these regions came I following him,

					 					Sick-hearted, weary⁠—so I took a whim

					 					To stray away into these forests drear

					 					Alone, without a peer:

					 					And I have told thee all thou mayest hear.



				 					“Young Stranger!

					 					I’ve been a ranger

					 					In search of pleasure throughout every clime:

					 					Alas, ’tis not for me!

					 					Bewitch’d I sure must be,

					 					To lose in grieving all my maiden prime.



				 					“Come then, Sorrow!

					 					Sweetest Sorrow!

					 					Like an own babe I nurse thee on my breast;

					 					I thought to leave thee

					 					And deceive thee,

					 					But now of all the world I love thee best.



				 					“There is not one,

					 					No, no, not one

					 					But thee to comfort a poor lonely maid;

					 					Thou art her mother,

					 					And her brother,

					 					Her playmate, and her wooer in the shade.”



				 					O what a sigh she gave in finishing,

					 					And look, quite dead to every wordly thing!

					 					Endymion could not speak, but gazed on her;

					 					And listened to the wind that now did stir

					 					About the crisped oaks full drearily,

					 					Yet with as sweet a softness as might be

					 					Remember’d from its velvet summer song.

					 					At last he said: “Poor lady, how thus long

					 					Have I been able to endure that voice?

					 					Fair Melody! kind Siren! I’ve no choice;

					 					I must be thy sad servant evermore:

					 					I cannot choose but kneel here and adore.

					 					Alas, I must not think⁠—by Phœbe, no!

					 					Let me not think, soft Angel! shall it be so?

					 					Say, beautifullest, shall I never think?

					 					O thou couldst foster me beyond the brink

					 					Of recollection! make my watchful care

					 					Close up its bloodshot eyes, nor see despair!

					 					Do gently murder half my soul, and I

					 					Shall feel the other half so utterly!⁠—

					 					I’m giddy at that cheek so fair and smooth;

					 					O let it blush so ever! let it soothe

					 					My madness! let it mantle rosy-warm

					 					With the tinge of love, panting in safe alarm.⁠—

					 					This cannot be thy hand, and yet it is;

					 					And this is sure thine other softling⁠—this

					 					Thine own fair bosom, and I am so near!

					 					Wilt fall asleep! O let me sip that tear!

					 					And whisper one sweet word that I may know

					 					This is this world⁠—sweet dewy blossom!”⁠—Woe!

					 					 						Woe! woe to that Endymion! Where is he?⁠—

					 					Even these words went echoing dismally

					 					Through the wide forest⁠—a most fearful tone,

					 					Like one repenting in his latest moan;

					And while it died away a shade pass’d by,

					 					As of a thundercloud. When arrows fly

					 					Through the thick branches, poor ringdoves sleek forth

					 					Their timid necks and tremble; so these both

					 					Leant to each other trembling, and sat so

					 					Waiting for some destruction⁠—when lo!

					 					Foot-feather’d Mercury appear’d sublime

					 					Beyond the tall tree tops; and in less time

					 					Than shoots the slanted hail-storm, down he dropt

					 					Towards the ground; but rested not, nor stopt

					 					One moment from his home: only the sward

					 					He with his wand light touch’d, and heavenward

					 					Swifter than sight was gone⁠—even before

					 					The teeming earth a sudden witness bore

					 					Of his swift magic. Diving swans appear

					 					Above the crystal circlings white and clear;

					 					And catch the cheated eye in wild surprise,

					 					How they can dive in sight and unseen rise⁠—

					 					So from the turf outsprang two steeds jet-black,

					 					Each with large dark blue wings upon his back.

					 					The youth of Caria placed the lovely dame

					 					On one, and felt himself in spleen to tame

					 					The other’s fierceness. Through the air they flew,

					 					High as the eagles. Like two drops of dew

					 					Exhaled to Phœbus’ lips, away they are gone,

					 					Far from the earth away⁠—unseen, alone,

					 					Among cool clouds and winds, but that the free,

					 					The buoyant life of song can floating be

					 					Above their heads, and follow them untired.

					 					Muse of my native land, am I inspired?

					 					This is the giddy air, and I must spread

					 					Wide pinions to keep here; nor do I dread

					 					Or height, or depth, or width, or any chance

					 					Precipitous: I have beneath my glance

					 					Those towering horses and their mournful freight.

					 					Could I thus sail, and see, and thus await

					 					Fearless for power of thought, without thine aid?⁠—



				 					There is a sleepy dusk, an odorous shade

					 					From some approaching wonder, and behold

					 					Those winged steeds, with snorting nostrils bold

					 					Snuff at its faint extreme, and seem to tire,

					 					Dying to embers from their native fire!



				 					There curl’d a purple mist around them; soon,

					 					It seem’d as when around the pale new moon

					 					Sad Zephyr droops the clouds like weeping willow:

					 					’Twas Sleep slow journeying with head on pillow

					 					For the first time, since he came nigh dead-born

					 					From the old womb of night, his cave forlorn

					 					Had he left more forlorn; for the first time,

					 					He felt aloof the day and morning’s prime⁠—

					 					Because into his depth Cimmerian

					 					There came a dream, showing how a young man,

					 					Ere a lean bat could plump its wintery skin,

					 					Would at high Jove’s empyreal footstool win

					 					An immortality, and how espouse

					 					Jove’s daughter, and be reckon’d of his house.

					 					Now was he slumbering towards heaven’s gate,

					 					That he might at the threshold one hour wait

					 					To hear the marriage melodies, and then

					 					Sink downward to his dusky cave again.

					 					His litter of smooth semilucent mist,

					 					Diversely tinged with rose and amethyst,

					 					Puzzled those eyes that for the centre sought;

					 					And scarcely for one moment could be caught

					 					His sluggish form reposing motionless.

					 					Those two on winged steeds, with all the stress

					 					Of vision search’d for him, as one would look

					 					Athwart the sallows of a river nook

					 					To catch a glance at silver-throated eels,⁠—

					 					Or from old Skiddaw’s top, when fog conceals

					 					His rugged forehead in a mantle pale,

					 					With an eye-guess towards some pleasant vale

					 					Descry a favourite hamlet faint and far.



				 					These raven horses, though they foster’d are

					 					Of earth’s splenetic fire, dully drop

					 					Their full-vein’d ears, nostrils blood wide, and stop;

					 					Upon the spiritless mist have they outspread

					 					Their ample feathers, are in slumber dead,⁠—

					 					And on those pinions, level in mid air,

					 					Endymion sleepeth and the lady fair.

					 					Slowly they sail, slowly as icy isle

					 					Upon a calm sea drifting: and meanwhile

					 					The mournful wanderer dreams. Behold! he walks

					 					On heaven’s pavement; brotherly he talks

					 					To divine powers: from his hand full fain

					 					Juno’s proud birds are pecking pearly grain:

					 					He tries the nerve of Phœbus’ golden bow,

					 					And asketh where the golden apples grow:

					 					Upon his arm he braces Pallas’ shield,

					 					And strives in vain to unsettle and to wield

					 					A Jovian thunderbolt: arch Hebe brings

					 					A full-brimm’d goblet, dances lightly, sings

					 					And tantalizes long; at last he drinks,

					 					And lost in pleasure, at her feet he sinks,

					 					Touching with dazzled lips her starlight hand.

					 					He blows a bugle,⁠—an ethereal band

					 					Are visible above: the Seasons four,⁠—

					 					Green-kirtled Spring, flush Summer, golden store

					 					In Autumn’s sickle, Winter frosty hoar,

					 					Join dance with shadowy Hours; while still the blast,

					 					In swells unmitigated, still doth last

					 					To sway their floating morris. “Whose is this?

					 					Whose bugle?” he inquires: they smile⁠—“O Dis!

					 					Why is this mortal here? Dost thou not know

					 					Its mistress’ lips? Not thou?⁠—’Tis Dian’s: lo!

					 					She rises crescented!” He looks, ’tis she,

					 					His very goddess: good-bye earth, and sea,

					 					And air, and pains, and care, and suffering;

					 					Good-bye to all but love! Then doth he spring

					 					Towards her, and awakes⁠—and, strange, o’erhead,

					 					Of those same fragrant exhalations bred,

					 					Beheld awake his very dream: the gods

					 					Stood smiling; merry Hebe laughs and nods;

					 					And Phœbe bends towards him crescented.

					 					O state perplexing! On the pinion bed,

					 					Too well awake, he feels the panting side

					 					Of his delicious lady. He who died

					 					For soaring too audacious in the sun,

					 					When that same treacherous wax began to run,

					 					Felt not more tongue-tied than Endymion.

					 					His heart leapt up as to its rightful throne,

					 					To that fair-shadow’d passion pulsed its way⁠—

					 					Ah, what perplexity! Ah, well a day!

					 					So fond, so beauteous was his bed-fellow,

					 					He could not help but kiss her: then he grew

					 					Awhile forgetful of all beauty save

					 					Young Phœbe’s, golden-hair’d; and so ’gan crave

					 					Forgiveness: yet he turn’d once more to look

					 					At the sweet sleeper,⁠—all his soul was shook,⁠—

					 					She press’d his hand in slumber; so once more

					 					He could not help but kiss her and adore.

					 					At this the shadow wept, melting away.

					 					The Latmian started up: “Bright goddess, stay!

					 					Search my most hidden breast! By truth’s own tongue,

					 					I have no dædale heart; why is it wrung

					 					To desperation? Is there nought for me,

					 					Upon the bourne of bliss, but misery?”



				 					These words awoke the stranger of dark tresses:

					 					Her dawning love-look rapt Endymion blesses

					 					With ’haviour soft. Sleep yawn’d from underneath.

					 					“Thou swan of Ganges, let us no more breathe

					 					This murky phantasm! thou contented seem’st

					 					Pillow’d in lovely idleness, nor dream’st

					 					What horrors may discomfort thee and me.

					 					Ah, shouldst thou die from my heart-treachery!⁠—

					 					Yet did she merely weep⁠—her gentle soul

					 					Hath no revenge in it: as it is whole

					 					In tenderness, would I were whole in love!

					 					Can I prize thee, fair maid, all price above,

					 					Even when I feel as true as innocence?

					 					I do, I do.⁠—What is this soul then? Whence

					 					Came it? It does not seem my own, and I

					 					Have no self-passion or identity.

					 					Some fearful end must be: where, where is it?

					 					By Nemesis, I see my spirit flit

					 					Alone about the dark⁠—Forgive me, sweet:

					 					Shall we away?” He roused the steeds; they beat

					 					Their wings chivalrous into the clear air,

					 					Leaving old Sleep within his vapoury lair.



				 					The good-night blush of eve was waning slow,

					 					And Vesper, risen star, began to throe

					 					In the dusk heavens silvery, when they

					 					Thus sprang direct towards the Galaxy.

					 					Nor did speed hinder converse soft and strange⁠—

					 					Eternal oaths and vows they interchange,

					 					In such wise, in such temper, so aloof

					 					Up in the winds, beneath a starry roof,

					 					So witless of their doom, that verily

					 					’Tis well nigh past man’s search their hearts to see⁠—

					 					Whether they wept, or laugh’d or grieved or toy’d⁠—

					 					Most like with joy gone mad, with sorrow cloy’d.



				 					Full facing their swift flight, from ebon streak,

					 					The moon put forth a little diamond peak,

					 					No bigger than an unobserved star,

					 					On tiny point of fairy scimetar:

					 					Bright signal that she only stoop’d to tie

					 					Her silver sandals, ere deliciously

					 					She bow’d into the heavens her timid head.

					 					Slowly she rose, as though she would have fled,

					 					While to his lady meek the Carian turn’d,

					 					To mark if her dark eyes had yet discern’d

					 					This beauty in its birth⁠—Despair! despair!

					 					He saw her body fading gaunt and spare

					 					In the cold moonshine. Straight he seized her wrist;

					 					It melted from his grasp; her hand he kiss’d,

					 					And, horror! kiss’d his own⁠—he was alone.

					 					Her steed a little higher soar’d and then

					 					Dropt hawk-wise to the earth.



				 					There lies a den,

					 					Beyond the seeming confines of the space

					 					Made for the soul to wander in and trace

					 					Its own existence, of remotest glooms.

					 					Dark regions are around it, where the tombs

					 					Of buried griefs the spirit sees, but scarce

					 					One hour doth linger weeping, for the pierce

					 					Of new-born woe it feels more inly smart:

					 					And in these regions many a venom’d dart

					 					At random flies; they are the proper home

					 					Of every ill: the man is yet to come

					 					Who hath not journey’d in this native hell.

					 					But few have ever felt how calm and well

					 					Sleep may be had in that deep den of all.

					 					There anguish does not sting, nor pleasure pall;

					 					Woe-hurricanes beat ever at the gate,

					 					Yet all is still within and desolate.

					 					Beset with painful gusts, within ye hear

					 					No sound so loud as when on curtain’d bier

					 					The death-watch tick is stifled. Enter none

					 					Who strive therefor: on the sudden it is won.

					 					Just when the sufferer begins to burn,

					 					Then it is free to him; and from an urn,

					 					Still fed by melting ice, he takes a draught⁠—

					 					Young Semele such richness never quaff’d

					 					In her maternal longing. Happy gloom!

					 					Dark Paradise! where pale becomes the bloom

					 					Of health by due; where silence dreariest

					 					Is most articulate; where hopes infest;

					 					Where those eyes are the brightest far that keep

					 					Their lids shut longest in a dreamless sleep.

					 					O happy spirit-home! O wondrous soul!

					 					Pregnant with such a den to save the whole

					 					In thine own depth. Hail, gentle Carian!

					 					For, never since thy griefs and woes began,

					 					Hast thou felt so content: a grievous feud

					 					Hath led thee to this Cave of Quietude.

					 					Aye, his lull’d soul was there, although upborne,

					 					With dangerous speed: and so he did not mourn

					 					Because he knew not whither he was going.

					 					So happy was he, not the aerial blowing

					 					Of trumpets at clear parley from the east

					 					Could rouse from that fine relish, that high feast.

					 					They stung the feather’d horse; with fierce alarm

					 					He flapp’d towards the sound. Alas, no charm

					 					Could lift Endymion’s head, or he had view’d

					 					A skyey mask, a pinion’d multitude,⁠—

					 					And silvery was its passing: voices sweet

					 					Warbling the while as if to lull and greet

					 					The wanderer in his path. Thus warbled they,

					 					While past the vision went in bright array.



				 					“Who, who from Dian’s feast would be away?

					 					For all the golden bowers of the day

					 					Are empty left? Who, who away would be

					 					From Cynthia’s wedding and festivity?

					 					Not Hesperus: lo! upon his silver wings

					 					He leans away for highest heaven and sings,

					 					Snapping his lucid fingers merrily!⁠—

					 					Ah, Zephyrus! art here, and Flora too!

					 					Ye tender bibbers of the rain and dew,

					 					Young playmates of the rose and daffodil,

					 					Be careful, ere ye enter in, to fill

					 					Your baskets high

					 					With fennel green, and balm, and golden pines,

					 					Savory, latter-mint, and columbines,

					 					Cool parsley, basil sweet, and sunny thyme;

					 					Yea, every flower and leaf of every clime,

					 					All gather’d in the dewy morning: hie

					 					Away! fly, fly!⁠—

					 					Crystalline brother of the belt of heaven,

					 					Aquarius! to whom king Jove has given

					 					Two liquid pulse streams ’stead of feather’d wings,

					 					Two fanlike fountains⁠—thine illuminings

					 					For Dian play:

					 					Dissolve the frozen purity of air;

					 					Let thy white shoulders silvery and bare

					 					Show cold through watery pinions; make more bright

					 					The Star-Queen’s crescent on her marriage night:

					 					Haste, haste away!⁠—

					 					Castor has tamed the planet Lion, see!

					 					And of the Bear has Pollux mastery:

					 					A third is in the race! who is the third,

					 					Speeding away swift as the eagle bird?

					 					The ramping Centaur!

					 					The Lion’s mane’s on end: the Bear how fierce!

					 					The Centaur’s arrow ready seems to pierce

					 					Some enemy: far forth his bow is bent

					 					Into the blue of heaven. He’ll be shent,

					 					Pale unrelentor,

					 					When he shall hear the wedding lutes a-playing.⁠—

					 					Andromeda! sweet woman! why delaying

					 					So timidly among the stars: come hither!

					 					Join this bright throng, and nimbly follow whither

					 					They all are going.

					 					Danae’s Son, before Jove newly bow’d,

					 					Has wept for thee, calling to Jove aloud.

					 					Thee, gentle lady, did he disenthrall:

					 					Ye shall for ever live and love, for all

					 					Thy tears are flowing.⁠—

					 					By Daphne’s fright, behold Apollo!”⁠—



				 					More

					 					Endymion heard not: down his steed him bore,

					 					Prone to the green head of a misty hill.



				 					His first touch of the earth went nigh to kill.

					 					“Alas!” said he, “were I but always borne

					 					Through dangerous winds, had but my footsteps worn

					 					A path in hell, for ever would I bless

					 					Horrors which nourish an uneasiness

					 					For my own sullen conquering: to him

					 					Who lives beyond earth’s boundary, grief is dim,

					 					Sorrow is but a shadow: now I see

					 					The grass; I feel the solid ground⁠—Ah, me!

					 					It is thy voice⁠—divinest! Where?⁠—who? who

					 					Left thee so quiet on this bed of dew?

					 					Behold upon this happy earth we are;

					 					Let us ay love each other; let us fare

					 					On forest-fruits, and never, never go

					 					Among the abodes of mortals here below,

					 					Or be by phantoms duped. O destiny!

					 					Into a labyrinth now my soul would fly,

					 					But with thy beauty will I deaden it.

					 					Where didst thou melt to? By thee will I sit

					 					For ever: let our fate stop here⁠—a kid

					 					I on this spot will offer: Pan will bid

					 					Us live in peace, in love and peace among

					 					His forest wildernesses. I have clung

					 					To nothing, loved a nothing, nothing seen

					 					Or felt but a great dream! Oh, I have been

					 					Presumptuous against love, against the sky,

					 					Against all elements, against the tie

					 					Of mortals each to each, against the blooms

					 					Of flowers, rush of rivers, and the tombs

					 					Of heroes gone! Against his proper glory

					 					Has my own soul conspired: so my story

					 					Will I to children utter, and repent.

					 					There never lived a mortal man, who bent

					 					His appetite beyond his natural sphere,

					 					But starved and died. My sweetest Indian, here,

					 					Here will I kneel, for thou redeemed hast

					 					My life from too thin breathing: gone and past

					 					Are cloudy phantasms. Caverns lone, farewell!

					 					And air of visions, and the monstrous swell

					 					Of visionary seas! No, never more

					 					Shall airy voices cheat me to the shore

					 					Of tangled wonder, breathless and aghast.

					 					Adieu, my daintiest Dream! although so vast

					 					My love is still for thee. The hour may come

					 					When we shall meet in pure elysium.

					 					On earth I may not love thee; and therefore

					 					Doves will I offer up, and sweetest store

					 					All through the teeming year: so thou wilt shine

					 					On me, and on this damsel fair of mine,

					 					And bless our simple lives. My Indian bliss!

					 					My river-lily bud! one human kiss!

					 					One sigh of real breath⁠—one gentle squeeze,

					 					Warm as a dove’s nest among summer trees,

					 					And warm with dew at ooze from living blood!

					 					Whither didst melt? Ah, what of that!⁠—all good

					 					We’ll talk about⁠—no more of dreaming.⁠—Now,

					 					Where shall our dwelling be? Under the brow

					 					Of some steep mossy hill, where ivy dun

					 					Would hide us up, although spring leaves were none;

					 					And where dark yew trees, as we rustle through,

					 					Will drop their scarlet berry cups of dew?

					 					O thou wouldst joy to live in such a place;

					 					Dusk for our loves, yet light enough to grace

					 					Those gentle limbs on mossy bed reclined:

					 					For by one step the blue sky shouldst thou find,

					 					And by another, in deep dell below,

					 					See, through the trees, a little river go

					 					All in its mid-day gold and glimmering.

					 					Honey from out the gnarled hive I’ll bring,

					 					And apples, wan with sweetness, gather thee,⁠—

					 					Cresses that grow where no man may them see,

					 					And sorrel untorn by the dew-claw’d stag:

					 					Pipes will I fashion of the syrinx flag,

					 					That thou mayst always know whither I roam,

					 					When it shall please thee in our quiet home

					 					To listen and think of love. Still let me speak;

					 					Still let me dive into the joy I seek,⁠—

					 					For yet the past doth prison me. The rill,

					 					Thou haply mayst delight in, will I fill

					 					With fairy fishes from the mountain tarn,

					 					And thou shalt feed them from the squirrel’s barn.

					 					Its bottom will I strew with amber shells,

					 					And pebbles blue from deep enchanted wells.

					 					Its sides I’ll plant with dew-sweet eglantine,

					 					And honeysuckles full of clear bee-wine.

					 					I will entice this crystal rill to trace

					 					Love’s silver name upon the meadow’s face.

					 					I’ll kneel to Vesta, for a flame of fire;

					 					And to god Phœbus, for a golden lyre;

					 					To Empress Dian, for a hunting-spear;

					 					To Vesper, for a taper silver-clear,

					 					That I may see thy beauty through the night;

					 					To Flora, and a nightingale shall light

					 					Tame on thy finger; to the River-gods,

					 					And they shall bring thee taper fishing-rods

					 					Of gold, and lines of Naiads’ long bright tress.

					 					Heaven shield thee for thine utter loveliness!

					 					Thy mossy footstool shall the altar be

					 					’Fore which I’ll bend, bending, dear love, to thee:

					 					Those lips shall be my Delphos, and shall speak

					 					Laws to my footsteps, colour to my cheek,

					 					Trembling or steadfastness to this same voice,

					 					And of three sweetest pleasurings the choice:

					 					And that affectionate light, those diamond things,

					 					Those eyes, those passions, those supreme pearl springs,

					 					Shall be my grief, or twinkle me to pleasure.

					 					Say, is not bliss within our perfect seizure?

					 					O that I could not doubt!”



				 					The mountaineer

					 					Thus strove by fancies vain and crude to clear

					 					His brier’d path to some tranquillity.

					 					It gave bright gladness to his lady’s eye,

					 					And yet the tears she wept were tears of sorrow;

					 					Answering thus, just as the golden morrow

					 					Beam’d upward from the valleys of the east:

					 					“O that the flutter of his heart had ceased,

					 					Or the sweet name of love had pass’d away.

					 					Young feather’d tyrant! by a swift decay

					 					Wilt thou devote this body to the earth:

					 					And I do think that at my very birth

					 					I lisp’d thy blooming titles inwardly;

					 					For at the first, first dawn and thought of thee,

					 					With uplift hands I blest the stars of heaven.

					 					Art thou not cruel? Ever have I striven

					 					To think thee kind, but ah, it will not do!

					 					When yet a child, I heard that kisses drew

					 					Favour from thee, and so I gave and gave

					 					To the void air, bidding them find out love:

					 					But when I came to feel how far above

					 					All fancy, pride, and fickle maidenhood,

					 					All earthly pleasure, all imagined good,

					 					Was the warm tremble of a devout kiss,⁠—

					 					Even then, that moment, at the thought of this,

					 					Fainting I fell into a bed of flowers,

					 					And languish’d there three days. Ye milder powers,

					 					Am I not cruelly wrong’d? Believe, believe

					 					Me, dear Endymion, were I to weave

					 					With my own fancies garlands of sweet life,

					 					Thou shouldst be one of all. Ah, bitter strife!

					 					I may not be thy love: I am forbidden⁠—

					 					Indeed I am⁠—thwarted, affrighted, chidden,

					 					By things I tremble at, and gorgon wrath.

					 					Twice hast thou ask’d whither I went: henceforth

					 					Ask me no more! I may not utter it,

					 					Nor may I be thy love. We might commit

					 					Ourselves at once to vengeance; we might die;

					 					We might embrace and die: voluptuous thought!

					 					Enlarge not to my hunger, or I’m caught

					 					In trammels of perverse deliciousness.

					 					No, no, that shall not be: thee will I bless,

					 					And bid a long adieu.”



				 					The Carian

					 					No word return’d: both lovelorn, silent, wan,

					 					Into the valleys green together went.

					 					Far wandering, they were perforce content

					 					To sit beneath a fair lone beechen tree;

					 					Nor at each other gazed, but heavily

					 					Pored on its hazel cirque of shedded leaves.



				 					Endymion! unhappy! it nigh grieves

					 					Me to behold thee thus in last extreme:

					 					Enskied ere this, but truly that I deem

					 					Truth the best music in a first-born song.

					 					Thy lute-voiced brother will I sing ere long,

					 					And thou shalt aid⁠—hast thou not aided me?

					 					Yes, moonlight Emperor! felicity

					 					Has been thy meed for many thousand years;

					 					Yet often have I, on the brink of tears,

					 					Mourn’d as if yet thou wert a forester;⁠—

					 					Forgetting the old tale.



				 					He did not stir

					 					His eyes from the dead leaves, or one small pulse

					 					Of joy he might have felt. The spirit culls

					 					Unfaded amaranth, when wild it strays

					 					Through the old garden-ground of boyish days.

					 					A little onward ran the very stream

					 					By which he took his first soft poppy dream;

					 					And on the very bark ’gainst which he leant

					 					A crescent he had carved, and round it spent

					 					His skill in little stars. The teeming tree

					 					Had swollen and green’d the pious charactery.

					 					But not ta’en out. Why, there was not a slope

					 					Up which he had not fear’d the antelope;

					 					And not a tree, beneath whose rooty shade

					 					He had not with his tamed leopards play’d;

					 					Nor could an arrow light, or javelin,

					 					Fly in the air where his had never been⁠—

					 					And yet he knew it not.



				 					O treachery!

					 					Why does his lady smile, pleasing her eye

					 					With all his sorrowing? He sees her not.

					 					But who so stares on him? His sister sure!

					 					Peona of the woods!⁠—Can she endure⁠—

					 					Impossible⁠—how dearly they embrace!

					 					His lady smiles; delight is in her face;

					 					It is no treachery.



				 					“Dear brother mine!

					 					Endymion, weep not so! Why shouldst thou pine

					 					When all great Latmos so exalt will be?

					 					Thank the great gods, and look not bitterly;

					 					And speak not one pale word, and sigh no more.

					 					Sure I will not believe thou hast such store

					 					Of grief, to last thee to my kiss again.

					 					Thou surely canst not bear a mind in pain,

					 					Come hand in hand with one so beautiful.

					 					Be happy both of you! for I will pull

					 					The flowers of autumn for your coronals.

					 					Pan’s holy priest for young Endymion calls;

					 					And when he is restored, thou, fairest dame,

					 					Shalt be our queen. Now, is it not a shame

					 					To see ye thus,⁠—not very, very sad?

					 					Perhaps ye are too happy to be glad:

					 					O feel as if it were a common day;

					 					Free-voiced as one who never was away.

					 					No tongue shall ask, Whence come ye? but ye shall

					 					Be gods of your own rest imperial.

					 					Not even I, for one whole month, will pry

					 					Into the hours that have pass’d us by,

					 					Since in my arbour I did sing to thee.

					 					O Hermes! on this very night will be

					 					A hymning up to Cynthia, queen of light;

					 					For the soothsayers old saw yesternight

					 					Good visions in the air,⁠—whence will befall,

					 					As say these sages, health perpetual

					 					To shepherds and their flocks; and furthermore,

					 					In Dian’s face they read the gentle lore:

					 					Therefore for her these vesper-carols are.

					 					Our friends will all be there from nigh and far.

					 					Many upon thy death have ditties made;

					 					And many, even now, their foreheads shade

					 					With cypress, on a day of sacrifice.

					 					New singing for our maids shalt thou devise,

					 					And pluck the sorrow from our huntsmen’s brows.

					 					Tell me, my lady-queen, how to espouse

					 					This wayward brother to his rightful joys!

					 					His eyes are on thee bent, as thou didst poise

					 					His fate most goddess-like. Help me, I pray,

					 					To lure⁠—Endymion, dear brother, say

					 					What ails thee?” He could bear no more, and so

					 					Bent his soul fiercely like a spiritual bow,

					 					And twang’d it inwardly, and calmly said:

					 					“I would have thee my only friend, sweet maid!

					 					My only visitor! not ignorant though,

					 					That those deceptions which for pleasure go

					 					’Mong men, are pleasures real as real may be;

					 					But there are higher ones I may not see,

					 					If impiously an earthly realm I take,

					 					Since I saw thee, I have been wide awake

					 					Night after night, and day by day, until

					 					Of the empyrean I have drunk my fill.

					 					Let it content thee. Sister, seeing me

					 					More happy than betides mortality.

					 					A hermit young, I’ll live in mossy cave,

					 					Where thou alone shalt come to me, and lave

					 					Thy spirit in the wonders I shall tell.

					 					Through me the shepherd realm shall prosper well;

					 					For to thy tongue will I all health confide.

					 					And, for my sake, let this young maid abide

					 					With thee as a dear sister. Thou alone,

					 					Peona, mayst return to me. I own

					 					This may sound strangely: but when, dearest girl,

					 					Thou seest it for my happiness, no pearl

					 					Will trespass down those cheeks. Companion fair!

					 					Wilt be content to dwell with her, to share

					 					This sister’s love with me?” Like one resign’d

					 					And bent by circumstance, and thereby blind

					 					In self-commitment, thus that meek unknown:

					 					“Aye, but a buzzing by my ears has flown,

					 					Of jubilee to Dian:⁠—truth I heard!

					 					Well then, I see there is no little bird,

					 					Tender soever, but is Jove’s own care.

					 					Long have I sought for rest, and, unaware,

					 					Behold I find it! so exalted too!

					 					So after my own heart! I knew, I knew

					 					There was a place untenanted in it;

					 					In that same void white Chastity shall sit,

					 					And monitor me nightly to lone slumber.

					 					With sanest lips I vow me to the number

					 					Of Dian’s sisterhood; and, kind lady,

					 					With thy good help, this very night shall see

					 					My future days to her fane consecrate.”



				 					As feels a dreamer what doth most create

					 					His own particular fright, so these three felt:

					 					Or like one who, in after ages, knelt

					 					To Lucifer or Baal, when he’d pine

					 					After a little sleep: or when in mine

					 					Far under-ground, a sleeper meets his friends

					 					Who know him not. Each diligently bends

					 					Towards common thoughts and things for very fear;

					 					Striving their ghastly malady to cheer,

					 					By thinking it a thing of yes and no,

					 					That housewives talk of. But the spirit-blow

					 					Was struck, and all were dreamers. At the last

					 					Endymion said: “Are not our fates all cast?

					 					Why stand we here? Adieu, ye tender pair!

					 					Adieu!” Whereat those maidens, with wild stare,

					 					Walk’d dizzily away. Pained and hot

					 					His eyes went after them, until they got

					 					Near to a cypress grove, whose deadly maw,

					 					In one swift moment, would what then he saw

					 					Engulf for ever. “Stay,” he cried, “ah, stay!

					 					Turn, damsels! hist! one word I have to say:

					 					Sweet Indian, I would see thee once again.

					 					It is a thing I dote on: so I’d fain,

					 					Peona, ye should hand in hand repair,

					 					Into those holy groves that silent are

					 					Behind great Dian’s temple. I’ll be yon,

					 					At Vesper’s earliest twinkle⁠—they are gone⁠—

					 					But once, once, once again⁠—” At this he press’d

					 					His hands against his face, and then did rest

					 					His head upon a mossy hillock green,

					 					And so remain’d as he a corpse had been

					 					All the long day; save when he scantly lifted

					 					His eyes abroad, to see how shadows shifted

					 					With the slow move of time,⁠—sluggish and weary

					 					Until the poplar tops, in journey dreary,

					 					Had reach’d the river’s brim. Then up he rose,

					 					And, slowly as that very river flows,

					 					Walk’d towards the temple grove with this lament:

					 					“Why such a golden eve? The breeze is sent

					 					Careful and soft, that not a leaf may fall

					 					Before the serene father of them all

					 					Bows down his summer head below the west.

					 					Now am I of breath, speech, and speed possest,

					 					But at the setting I must bid adieu

					 					To her for the last time. Night will strew

					 					On the damp grass myriads of lingering leaves,

					 					And with them shall I die; nor much it grieves

					 					To die, when summer dies on the cold sward.

					 					Why, I have been a butterfly, a lord

					 					Of flowers, garlands, love-knots, silly posies.

					 					Groves, meadows, melodies, and arbour-roses;

					 					My kingdom’s at its death, and just it is

					 					That I should die with it: so in all this

					 					We miscall grief, bale, sorrow, heart-break, woe,

					 					Where is there to plain of? By Titan’s foe

					 					I am but rightly served.” So saying, he

					 					Tripp’d lightly on, in sort of deathful glee;

					 					Laughing at the clear stream and setting sun,

					 					As though they jests had been: nor had he done

					 					His laugh at nature’s holy countenance,

					 					Until that grove appear’d, as if perchance,

					 					And then his tongue with sober seemlihed

					 					Gave utterance as he enter’d: “Ha!” I said,

					 					“King of the butterflies; but by this gloom,

					 					And by old Rhadamanthus’ tongue of doom.

					 					This dusk religion, pomp of solitude,

					 					And the Promethean clay by thief endued,

					 					By old Saturnus’ forelock, by his head

					 					Shook with eternal palsy, I did wed

					 					Myself to things of light from infancy;

					 					And thus to be cast out, thus lorn to die,

					 					Is sure enough to make a mortal man

					 					Grow impious.” So he inwardly began

					 					On things for which no wording can be found;

					 					Deeper and deeper sinking, until drown’d

					 					Beyond the reach of music: for the choir

					 					Of Cynthia he heard not, though rough brier

					 					Nor muffling thicket interposed to dull

					 					The vesper hymn, far swollen, soft and full,

					 					Through the dark pillars of those sylvan aisles.

					 					He saw not the two maidens, nor their smiles,

					 					Wan as primroses gather’d at midnight

					 					By chilly-finger’d spring. “Unhappy wight!

					 					Endymion!” said Peona, “we are here!

					 					What wouldst thou ere we all are laid on bier?

					 					Then he embraced her, and his lady’s hand

					 					Press’d, saying: “Sister, I would have command,

					 					If it were heaven’s will, on our sad fate.”

					 					At which that dark-eyed stranger stood elate

					 					And said, in a new voice, but sweet as love,

					 					To Endymion’s amaze: “By Cupid’s dove,

					 					And so thou shalt! and by the lily truth

					 					Of my own breast thou shalt, beloved youth!”

					 					And as she spake, into her face there came

					 					Light, as reflected from a silver flame:

					 					Her long black hair swell’d ampler, in display

					 					Full golden; in her eyes a brighter day

					 					Dawn’d blue, and full of love. Aye, he beheld

					 					Phœbe, his passion! joyous she upheld

					 					Her lucid bow, continuing thus: “Drear, drear

					 					Has our delaying been; but foolish fear

					 					Withheld me first; and then decrees of fate;

					 					And then ’twas fit that from this mortal state

					 					Thou shouldst, my love, by some unlook’d-for change

					 					Be spiritualized. Peona, we shall range

					 					These forests, and to thee they safe shall be

					 					As was thy cradle; hither shalt thou flee

					 					To meet us many a time.” Next Cynthia bright

					 					Peona kiss’d, and bless’d with fair good night:

					 					Her brother kiss’d her too, and knelt adown

					 					Before his goddess, in a blissful swoon.

					 					She gave her fair hands to him, and behold,

					 					Before three swiftest kisses he had told,

					 					They vanish’d far away!⁠—Peona went

					 					Home through the gloomy wood in wonderment.





On Oxford


			 				The Gothic looks solemn,

				 				The plain Doric column

				 				Supports an old Bishop and Crozier;

				 				The mouldering arch,

				 				Shaded o’er by a larch,

				 				Stands next door to Wilson the Hosier.



			 				Vice,⁠—that is, by turns,⁠—

				 				O’er pale faces mourns

				 				The black tassell’d trencher and common hat;

				 				The charity boy sings,

				 				The Steeple-bell rings

				 				And as for the Chancellor⁠—dominat.



			 				There are plenty of trees,

				 				And plenty of ease,

				 				And plenty of fat deer for Parsons;

				 				And when it is venison,

				 				Short is the benison,⁠—

				 				Then each on a leg or thigh fastens.





On ⸻


			 				Think not of it, sweet one, so;⁠—

				 				Give it not a tear;

				 				Sigh thou mayst, and bid it go

				 				Any⁠—any where.



			 				Do not look so sad, sweet one,⁠—

				 				Sad and fadingly;

				 				Shed one drop, then it is gone,

				 				Oh! ’twas born to die!



			 				Still so pale? then dearest weep;

				 				Weep, I’ll count the tears,

				 				For each will I invent a bliss

				 				For thee in after years.



			 				Brighter has it left thine eyes

				 				Than a sunny rill;

				 				And thy whispering melodies

				 				Are more tender still.



			 				Yet⁠—as all things mourn awhile

				 				At fleeting blisses;

				 				E’en let us too; but be our dirge

				 				A dirge of kisses.





Lines


			 				Unfelt, unheard, unseen,

				 				I’ve left my little queen,

				 				Her languid arms in silver slumber lying:

				 				Ah! through their nestling touch,

				 				Who⁠—who could tell how much

				 				There is for madness⁠—cruel, or complying?



			 				Those faery lids how sleek!

				 				Those lips how moist!⁠—they speak,

				 				In ripest quiet, shadows of sweet sounds:

				 				Into my fancy’s ear

				 				Melting a burden dear,

				 				How “Love doth know no fulness, and no bounds.”



			 				True!⁠—tender monitors!

				 				I bend unto your laws:

				 				This sweetest day for dalliance was born!

				 				So, without more ado,

				 				I’ll feel my heaven anew,

				 				For all the blushing of the hasty morn.





Stanzas


			 				In a drear-nighted December

				 				Too happy, happy tree,

				 				Thy branches ne’er remember

				 				Their green felicity:

				 				The north cannot undo them,

				 				With a sleety whistle through them

				 				Nor frozen thawings glue them

				 				From budding at the prime.



			 				In a drear-nighted December,

				 				Too happy, happy brook,

				 				Thy bubblings ne’er remember

				 				Apollo’s summer look;

				 				But with a sweet forgetting,

				 				They stay their crystal fretting,

				 				Never, never petting

				 				About the frozen time.



			 				Ah! would ’twere so with many

				 				A gentle girl and boy!

				 				But were there ever any

				 				Writh’d not at passèd joy?

				 				To know the change and feel it,

				 				When there is none to heal it,

				 				Nor numbèd sense to steal it,

				 				Was never said in rhyme.





To a Cat


			 				Cat! who hast pass’d thy grand climacteric,

				 				How many mice and rats hast in thy days

				 				Destroy’d?⁠—How many tit-bits stolen? Gaze

				 				With those bright languid segments green, and prick

				 				Those velvet ears⁠—but pr’ythee do not stick

				 				Thy latent talons in me⁠—and upraise

				 				Thy gentle mew⁠—and tell me all thy frays

				 				Of fish and mice, and rats and tender chick:

				 				Nay, look not down, nor lick thy dainty wrists

				 				For all the wheezy asthma,⁠—and for all

				 				Thy tail’s tip is nick’d off⁠—and though the fists

				 				Of many a maid has given thee many a maul,

				 				Still is that fur as soft as when the lists

				 				In youth thou enter’dst on glass-bottled wall.





Sharing Eve’s Apple


			 				O blush not so! O blush not so!

				 				Or I shall think you knowing;

				 				And if you smile the blushing while,

				 				Then maidenheads are going.



			 				There’s a blush for won’t, and a blush for shan’t,

				 				And a blush for having done it:

				 				There’s a blush for thought and a blush for nought,

				 				And a blush for just begun it.



			 				O sigh not so! O sigh not so!

				 				For it sounds of Eve’s sweet Pippin;

				 				By these loosen’d lips you have tasted the pips

				 				And fought in an amorous nipping.



			 				Will you play once more at nice-cut-core,

				 				For it only will last our youth out,

				 				And we have the prime of the kissing time,

				 				We have not one sweet tooth out.



			 				There’s a sigh for yes, and a sigh for no,

				 				And a sigh for I can’t bear it!

				 				O what can be done, shall we stay or run?

				 				O cut the sweet apple and share it!





What the Thrush Said


			 				O thou whose face hath felt the Winter’s wind,

				 				Whose eye has seen the snow-clouds hung in mist,

				 				And the black elm tops ’mong the freezing stars,

				 				To thee the spring will be a harvest-time.

				 				O thou, whose only book has been the light

				 				Of supreme darkness which thou feddest on

				 				Night after night when Phœbus was away,

				 				To thee the Spring shall be a triple morn.

				 				O fret not after knowledge⁠—I have none,

				 				And yet my song comes native with the warmth.

				 				O fret not after knowledge⁠—I have none,

				 				And yet the Evening listens. He who saddens

				 				At thought of idleness cannot be idle,

				 				And he’s awake who thinks himself asleep.





				Robin Hood 				To a Friend




			 				No! those days are gone away,

				 				And their hours are old and gray,

				 				And their minutes buried all

				 				Under the down-trodden pall

				 				Of the leaves of many years:

				 				Many times have Winter’s shears,

				 				Frozen North, and chilling East,

				 				Sounded tempests to the feast

				 				Of the forest’s whispering fleeces,

				 				Since men knew nor rent nor leases.



			 				No, the bugle sounds no more,

				 				And the twanging bow no more;

				 				Silent is the ivory shrill

				 				Past the heath and up the hill;

				 				There is no mid-forest laugh,

				 				Where lone Echo gives the half

				 				To some wight, amaz’d to hear

				 				Jesting, deep in forest drear.



			 				On the fairest time of June

				 				You may go, with sun or moon,

				 				Or the seven stars to light you,

				 				Or the polar ray to right you;

				 				But you never may behold

				 				Little John, or Robin bold;

				 				Never one, of all the clan,

				 				Thrumming on an empty can

				 				Some old hunting ditty, while

				 				He doth his green way beguile

				 				To fair hostess Merriment,

				 				Down beside the pasture Trent;

				 				For he left the merry tale,

				 				Messenger for spicy ale.



			 				Gone, the merry morris din;

				 				Gone, the song of Gamelyn;

				 				Gone, the tough-belted outlaw

				 				Idling in the “grenè shawe;”

				 				All are gone away and past!

				 				And if Robin should be cast

				 				Sudden from his turfèd grave,

				 				And if Marian should have

				 				Once again her forest days,

				 				She would weep, and he would craze:

				 				He would swear, for all his oaks,

				 				Fall’n beneath the dock-yard strokes,

				 				Have rotted on the briny seas;

				 				She would weep that her wild bees

				 				Sang not to her⁠—strange! that honey

				 				Can’t be got without hard money!



			 				So it is; yet let us sing

				 				Honour to the old bow-string!

				 				Honour to the bugle horn!

				 				Honour to the woods unshorn!

				 				Honour to the Lincoln green!

				 				Honour to the archer keen!

				 				Honour to tight little John,

				 				And the horse he rode upon!

				 				Honour to bold Robin Hood,

				 				Sleeping in the underwood!

				 				Honour to Maid Marian,

				 				And to all the Sherwood clan!

				 				Though their days have hurried by,

				 				Let us two a burden try.





Lines on the Mermaid Tavern


			 				Souls of Poets dead and gone,

				 				What Elysium have ye known,

				 				Happy field or mossy cavern,

				 				Choicer than the Mermaid Tavern?

				 				Have ye tippled drink more fine

				 				Than mine host’s Canary wine?

				 				Or are fruits of Paradise

				 				Sweeter than those dainty pies

				 				Of venison? O generous food!

				 				Drest as though bold Robin Hood

				 				Would, with his maid Marian,

				 				Sup and bowse from horn and can.



			 				I have heard that on a day

				 				Mine host’s sign-board flew away,

				 				Nobody knew whither, till

				 				An astrologer’s old quill

				 				To a sheepskin gave the story,

				 				Said he saw you in your glory,

				 				Underneath a new-old sign

				 				Sipping beverage divine,

				 				And pledging with contented smack

				 				The Mermaid in the Zodiac.



			 				Souls of Poets dead and gone,

				 				What Elysium have ye known,

				 				Happy field or mossy cavern,

				 				Choicer than the Mermaid Tavern?





A Song of Opposites


				 					 						Under the flag

						 						Of each his faction, they to battle bring

						 						Their embryo atoms.



					Milton



				Welcome joy, and welcome sorrow,

				 				Lethe’s weed and Hermes’ feather;

				 				Come to-day, and come to-morrow,

				 				I do love you both together!

				 				I love to mark sad faces in fair weather;

				 				And hear a merry laugh amid the thunder;

				 				Fair and foul I love together.

				 				Meadows sweet where flames are under,

				 				And a giggle at a wonder;

				 				Visage sage at pantomime;

				 				Funeral, and steeple-chime;

				 				Infant playing with a skull;

				 				Morning fair, and shipwreck’d hull;

				 				Nightshade with the woodbine kissing;

				 				Serpents in red roses hissing;

				 				Cleopatra regal-dress’d

				 				With the aspic at her breast;

				 				Dancing music, music sad,

				 				Both together, sane and mad;

				 				Muses bright, and muses pale;

				 				Sombre Saturn, Momus hale;⁠—

				 				Laugh and sigh, and laugh again;

				 				Oh, the sweetness of the pain!

				 				Muses bright and muses pale,

				 				Bare your faces of the veil;

				 				Let me see; and let me write

				 				Of the day, and of the night⁠—

				 				Both together:⁠—let me slake

				 				All my thirst for sweet heart-ache!

				 				Let my bower be of yew,

				 				Interwreath’d with myrtles new:

				 				Pines and lime-trees full in bloom,

				 				And my couch a low grass-tomb.





On Seeing a Lock of Milton’s Hair


			 				Chief of organic numbers!

				 				Old Scholar of the Spheres!

				 				Thy spirit never slumbers,

				 				But rolls about our ears,

				 				For ever and for ever!

				 				O what a mad endeavour

				 				Worketh he,

				 				Who to thy sacred and ennobled hearse

				 				Would offer a burnt sacrifice of verse

				 				And melody.



			 				How heavenward thou soundest,

				 				Live Temple of sweet noise,

				 				And Discord unconfoundest,

				 				Giving Delight new joys,

				 				And Pleasure nobler pinions!

				 				O, where are thy dominions?

				 				Lend thine ear

				 				To a young Delian oath,⁠—ay, by thy soul,

				 				By all that from thy mortal lips did roll,

				 				And by the kernel of thine earthly love,

				 				Beauty, in things on earth, and things above,

				 				I swear!

				 				When every childish fashion

				 				Has vanish’d from my rhyme,

				 				Will I, grey-gone in passion,

				 				Leave to an after-time,

				 				Hymning and harmony

				 				Of thee, and of thy works, and of thy life;

				 				But vain is now the burning and the strife,

				 				Pangs are in vain, until I grow high-rife

				 				With old Philosophy,

				 				And mad with glimpses of futurity!



			 				For many years my offering must be hush’d;

				 				When I do speak, I’ll think upon this hour,

				 				Because I feel my forehead hot and flush’d.

				 				Even at the simplest vassal of thy power,⁠—

				 				A lock of thy bright hair⁠—

				 				Sudden it came.

				 				And I was startled, when I caught thy name

				 				Coupled so unaware;

				 				Yet, at the moment, temperate was my blood.

				 				I thought I had beheld it from the flood.





“Where’s the Poet? Show Him! Show Him”


			 				Where’s the Poet? Show him! show him,

				 				Muses nine! that I may know him!

				 				’Tis the man who with a man

				 				Is an equal, be he King,

				 				Or poorest of the beggar-clan,

				 				Or any other wondrous thing

				 				A man may be ’twixt ape and Plato;

				 				’Tis the man who with a bird,

				 				Wren, or Eagle, finds his way to

				 				All its instincts; he hath heard

				 				The Lion’s roaring, and can tell

				 				What his horny throat expresseth,

				 				And to him the Tiger’s yell

				 				Comes articulate and presseth

				 				On his ear like mother-tongue.





A Draught of Sunshine


			 				Hence Burgundy, Claret, and Port,

				 				Away with old Hock and Madeira,

				 				Too earthly ye are for my sport;

				 				There’s a beverage brighter and clearer.

				 				Instead of a pitiful rummer,

				 				My wine overbrims a whole summer;

				 				My bowl is the sky,

				 				And I drink at my eye,

				 				Till I feel in the brain

				 				A Delphian pain⁠—

				 				Then follow, my Caius! then follow:

				 				On the green of the hill

				 				We will drink our fill

				 				Of golden sunshine,

				 				Till our brains intertwine

				 				With the glory and grace of Apollo!

				 				God of the Meridian,

				 				And of the East and West,

				 				To thee my soul is flown,

				 				And my body is earthward press’d.⁠—

				 				It is an awful mission,

				 				A terrible division;

				 				And leaves a gulf austere

				 				To be fill’d with worldly fear.

				 				Aye, when the soul is fled

				 				To high above our head,

				 				Affrighted do we gaze

				 				After its airy maze,

				 				As doth a mother wild,

				 				When her young infant child

				 				Is in an eagle’s claws⁠—

				 				And is not this the cause

				 				Of madness?⁠—God of Song,

				 				Thou bearest me along

				 				Through sights I scarce can bear:

				 				O let me, let me share

				 				With the hot lyre and thee,

				 				The staid Philosophy.

				 				Temper my lonely hours,

				 				And let me see thy bowers

				 				More unalarm’d!





Song




I


				 					Hush, hush! tread softly! hush, hush, my dear!

					 					All the house is asleep, but we know very well

					 					That the jealous, the jealous old bald-pate may hear,

					 					Tho’ you’ve padded his night-cap⁠—O sweet Isabel!

					 					Tho’ your feet are more light than a Faery’s feet,

					 					Who dances on bubbles where brooklets meet⁠—

					 					Hush, hush! soft tiptoe! hush, hush, my dear!

					 					For less than a nothing the jealous can hear.





II


				 					No leaf doth tremble, no ripple is there

					 					On the river,⁠—all’s still, and the night’s sleepy eye

					 					Closes up, and forgets all its Lethean care,

					 					Charm’d to death by the drone of the humming May-fly;

					 					And the Moon, whether prudish or complaisant,

					 					Has fled to her bower, well knowing I want

					 					No light in the dusk, no torch in the gloom,

					 					But my Isabel’s eyes, and her lips pulp’d with bloom.





III


				 					Lift the latch! ah gently! ah tenderly⁠—sweet!

					 					We are dead if that latchet gives one little clink!

					 					Well done⁠—now those lips, and a flowery seat⁠—

					 					The old man may sleep, and the planets may wink;

					 					The shut rose shall dream of our loves and awake

					 					Full-blown, and such warmth for the morning take,

					 					The stock-dove shall hatch her soft brace and shall coo,

					 					While I kiss to the melody, aching all through.





Extracts from an Opera




“O! Were I One of the Olympian Twelve”


				 					O! were I one of the Olympian twelve,

					 					Their godships should pass this into a law,⁠—

					 					That when a man doth set himself in toil

					 					After some beauty veiled far away,

					 					Each step he took should make his lady’s hand

					 					More soft, more white, and her fair cheek more fair:

					 					And for each briar-berry he might eat,

					 					A kiss should bud upon the tree of love,

					 					And pulp and ripen richer every hour,

					 					To melt away upon the traveller’s lips.





Daisy’s Song


				 					The sun, with his great eye,

					 					Sees not so much as I;

					 					And the moon, all silver-proud,

					 					Might as well be in a cloud.



				 					And O the spring⁠—the spring!

					 					I lead the life of a King!

					 					Couch’d in the teeming grass,

					 					I spy each pretty lass.



				 					I look where no one dares,

					 					And I stare where no one stares,

					 					And when the night is nigh,

					 					Lambs bleat my lullaby.





Folly’s Song


				 					When wedding fiddles are a-playing,

					 					Huzza for folly O!

					 					And when maidens go a-Maying,

					 					Huzza, etc.

					 					When a milk-pail is upset,

					 					Huzza, etc.

					 					And the clothes left in the wet,

					 					Huzza, etc.

					 					When the barrel’s set abroach,

					 					Huzza, etc.

					 					When Kate Eyebrow keeps a coach,

					 					Huzza, etc.

					 					When the pig is over-roasted,

					 					Huzza, etc.

					 					And the cheese is over-toasted.

					 					Huzza, etc.

					 					When Sir Snap is with his lawyer.

					 					Huzza, etc.

					 					And Miss Chip has kiss’d the sawyer;

					 					Huzza, etc.





“Oh, I Am Frighten’d with Most Hateful Thoughts!”


				 					Oh, I am frighten’d with most hateful thoughts!

					 					Perhaps her voice is not a nightingale’s,

					 					Perhaps her teeth are not the fairest pearl;

					 					Her eye-lashes may be, for aught I know,

					 					Not longer than the May-fly’s small fanhorns;

					 					There may not be one dimple on her hand;

					 					And freckles many; ah! a careless nurse,

					 					In haste to teach the little thing to walk,

					 					May have crumpt up a pair of Dian’s legs,

					 					And warpt the ivory of a Juno’s neck.





Song


				 					The stranger lighted from his steed,

					 					And ere he spake a word,

					 					He seiz’d my lady’s lily hand,

					 					And kiss’d it all unheard.



				 					The stranger walk’d into the hall,

					 					And ere he spake a word,

					 					He kiss’d my lady’s cherry lips,

					 					And kiss’d ’em all unheard.



				 					The stranger walk’d into the bower,⁠—

					 					But my lady first did go⁠,⁠—

					 					Ay hand in hand into the bower,

					 					Where my Lord’s roses blow.



				 					My lady’s maid had a silken scarf,

					 					And a golden ring had she,

					 					And a kiss from the stranger, as off he went

					 					Again on his palfrey.





“Asleep! O Sleep a Little While, White Pearl”


				 					Asleep! O sleep a little while, white pearl

					 					And let me kneel, and let me pray to thee,

					 					And let me call Heaven’s blessing on thine eyes,

					 					And let me breathe into the happy air,

					 					That doth enfold and touch thee all about,

					 					Vows or my slavery, my giving up,

					 					My sudden adoration, my great love!





Faery Songs




I


				 					Shed no tear! O shed no tear!

					 					The flower will bloom another year.

					 					Weep no more! O weep no more!

					 					Young buds sleep in the root’s white core.

					 					Dry your eyes! O dry your eyes,

					 					For I was taught in Paradise

					 					To ease my breast of melodies⁠—

					 					Shed no tear.



				 					Overhead! look overhead

					 					’Mong the blossoms white and red⁠—

					 					Look up, look up⁠—I flutter now

					 					On this flush pomegranate bough.

					 					See me! ’tis this silvery bill

					 					Ever cures the good man’s ill.

					 					Shed no tear! O shed no tear!

					 					The flower will bloom another year.

					 					Adieu, Adieu⁠—I fly, adieu,

					 					I vanish in the heaven’s blue⁠—

					 					Adieu, Adieu!





II


				 					Ah! woe is me! poor silver-wing!

					 					That I must chant thy lady’s dirge,

					 					And death to this fair haunt of spring,

					 					Of melody, and streams of flowery verge,⁠—

					 					Poor silver-wing! ah! woe is me!

					 					That I must see

					 					These blossoms snow upon thy lady’s pall!

					 					Go, pretty page! and in her ear

					 					Whisper that the hour is near!

					 					Softly tell her not to fear

					 					Such calm favonian burial!

					 					Go, pretty page! and soothly tell,⁠—

					 					The blossoms hang by a melting spell,

					 					And fall they must, ere a star wink thrice

					 					Upon her closed eyes,

					 					That now in vain are weeping their last tears,

					 					At sweet life leaving, and those arbours green,⁠—

					 					Rich dowry from the Spirit of the Spheres,⁠—

					 					Alas! poor Queen!





On Sitting Down to Read King Lear Once Again


			 				O golden-tongued Romance, with serene lute!

				 				Fair plumèd Syren, Queen of far away!

				 				Leave melodizing on this wintry day,

				 				Shut up thine olden pages, and be mute:

				 				Adieu! for once again the fierce dispute,

				 				Betwixt damnation and impassion’d clay,

				 				Must I burn through; once more humbly assay

				 				The bitter sweet of this Shakespearean fruit:

				 				Chief Poet! and ye clouds of Albion,

				 				Begetters of our deep eternal theme!

				 				When through the old oak forest I am gone,

				 				Let me not wander in a barren dream,

				 				But when I am consumèd in the Fire,

				 				Give me new Phœnix-wings to fly at my desire.





Sonnet


			 				When I have fears that I may cease to be

				 				Before my pen has glean’d my teeming brain,

				 				Before high pilèd books, in charactry,

				 				Hold like rich garners the full-ripen’d grain;

				 				When I behold, upon the night’s starr’d face,

				 				Huge cloudy symbols of a high romance,

				 				And think that I may never live to trace

				 				Their shadows, with the magic hand of chance;

				 				And when I feel, fair creature of an hour!

				 				That I shall never look upon thee more,

				 				Never have relish in the faery power

				 				Of unreflecting love;⁠—then on the shore

				 				Of the wide world I stand alone, and think

				 				Till Love and Fame to nothingness do sink.





To a Lady Seen for a Few Moments at Vauxhall


			 				Time’s sea hath been five years at its slow ebb,

				 				Long hours have to and fro let creep the sand,

				 				Since I was tangled in thy beauty’s web,

				 				And snared by the ungloving of thine hand.

				 				And yet I never look on midnight sky,

				 				But I behold thine eyes’ well-memoried light;

				 				I cannot look upon the rose’s dye,

				 				But to thy cheek my soul doth take its flight;

				 				I cannot look on any budding flower,

				 				But my fond ear, in fancy at thy lips

				 				And hearkening for a love-sound, doth devour

				 				Its sweets in the wrong sense:⁠—Thou dost eclipse

				 				Every delight with sweet remembering,

				 				And grief unto my darling joys dost bring.





To Spenser


			 				Spenser! a jealous honourer of thine,

				 				A forester deep in thy midmost trees,

				 				Did last eve ask my promise to refine

				 				Some English that might strive thine ear to please.

				 				But Elfin Poet, ’tis impossible

				 				For an inhabitant of wintry earth

				 				To rise like Phœbus with a golden quill

				 				Fire-wing’d and make a morning in his mirth.

				 				It is impossible to escape from toil

				 				O’ the sudden and receive thy spiriting:

				 				The flower must drink the nature of the soil

				 				Before it can put forth its blossoming:

				 				Be with me in the summer days, and I

				 				Will for thine honour and his pleasure try.





To the Nile


			 				Son of the old moon-mountains African!

				 				Chief of the Pyramid and Crocodile!

				 				We call thee fruitful, and that very while

				 				A desert fills our seeing’s inward span;

				 				Nurse of swart nations since the world began,

				 				Art thou so fruitful? or dost thou beguile

				 				Such men to honour thee, who, worn with toil,

				 				Rest for a space ’twixt Cairo and Decan?

				 				O may dark fancies err! They surely do;

				 				’Tis ignorance that makes a barren waste

				 				Of all beyond itself. Thou dost bedew

				 				Green rushes like our rivers, and dost taste

				 				The pleasant sun-rise. Green isles hast thou too,

				 				And to the sea as happily dost haste.





Written in Answer to a Sonnet Ending Thus


				 					 						“Dark eyes are dearer far

						 						Than those that mock the hyacinthine bell.”



					By J. H. Reynolds



				Blue! ’Tis the life of heaven,⁠—the domain

				 				Of Cynthia,⁠—the wide palace of the sun,⁠—

				 				The tent of Hesperus, and all his train,⁠—

				 				The bosomer of clouds, gold, gray, and dun.

				 				Blue! ’Tis the life of waters⁠—ocean

				 				And all its vassal streams, pools numberless,

				 				May rage, and foam, and fret, but never can

				 				Subside, if not to dark blue nativeness.

				 				Blue! Gentle cousin of the forest-green,

				 				Married to green in all the sweetest flowers,⁠—

				 				Forget-me-not,⁠—the blue bell,⁠—and, that queen

				 				Of secrecy, the violet: what strange powers

				 				Hast thou, as a mere shadow! But how great,

				 				When in an Eye thou art, alive with fate!





To Homer


			 				Standing aloof in giant ignorance,

				 				Of thee I hear and of the Cyclades,

				 				As one who sits ashore and longs perchance

				 				To visit dolphin-coral in deep seas.

				 				So thou wast blind!⁠—but then the veil was rent,

				 				For Jove uncurtain’d Heaven to let thee live,

				 				And Neptune made for thee a spumy tent,

				 				And Pan made sing for thee his forest-hive;

				 				Ay on the shores of darkness there is light,

				 				And precipices show untrodden green;

				 				There is a budding morrow in midnight;

				 				There is a triple sight in blindness keen:

				 				Such seeing hadst thou, as it once befell

				 				To Dian, Queen of Earth, and Heaven, and Hell.





To John Hamilton Reynolds


			 				O that a week could be an age, and we

				 				Felt parting and warm meeting every week;

				 				Then one poor year a thousand years would be,

				 				The flush of welcome ever on the cheek:

				 				So could we live long life in little space,

				 				So time itself would be annihilate.

				 				So a day’s journey in oblivious haze

				 				To serve our joys would lengthen and dilate.

				 				O to arrive each Monday morn from Ind!

				 				To land each Tuesday from the rich Levant!

				 				In little time a host of joys to bind,

				 				And keep our souls in one eternal pant!

				 				This morn, my friend, and yester-evening taught

				 				Me how to harbor such a happy thought.





The Human Seasons


			 				Four Seasons fill the measure of the year;

				 				There are four seasons in the mind of man:

				 				He has his lusty Spring, when fancy clear

				 				Takes in all beauty with an easy span:

				 				He has his Summer, when luxuriously

				 				Spring’s honied cud of youthful thought he loves

				 				To ruminate, and by such dreaming high

				 				Is nearest unto heaven: quiet coves

				 				His soul has in its Autumn, when his wings

				 				He furleth close; contented so to look

				 				On mists in idleness⁠—to let fair things

				 				Pass by unheeded as a threshold brook.

				 				He has his Winter too of pale misfeature,

				 				Or else he would forego his mortal nature.





The Devon Maid


			 				Where be ye going, you Devon Maid?

				 				And what have ye there in the Basket?

				 				Ye tight little fairy just fresh from the dairy,

				 				Will ye give me some cream if I ask it?



			 				I love your Meads, and I love your flowers,

				 				And I love your junkets mainly,

				 				But ’hind the door I love kissing more,

				 				O look not so disdainly.



			 				I love your hills, and I love your dales,

				 				And I love your flocks a-bleating⁠—

				 				But O, on the heather to lie together,

				 				With both our hearts a-beating!



			 				I’ll put your Basket all safe in a nook,

				 				Your shawl I hang up on the willow,

				 				And we will sigh in the daisy’s eye

				 				And kiss on a grass green pillow.





Epistle to John Hamilton Reynolds


			 				Dear Reynolds! As last night I lay in bed,

				 				There came before my eyes that wonted thread

				 				Of shapes, and shadows, and remembrances,

				 				That every other minute vex and please:

				 				Things all disjointed come from north and south,⁠—

				 				Two Witch’s eyes above a Cherub’s mouth,

				 				Voltaire with casque and shield and habergeon,

				 				And Alexander with his nightcap on;

				 				Old Socrates a-tying his cravat,

				 				And Hazlitt playing with Miss Edgeworth’s cat;

				 				And Junius Brutus, pretty well so so,

				 				Making the best of ’s way towards Soho.



			 				Few are there who escape these visitings,⁠—

				 				Perhaps one or two whose lives have patent wings,

				 				And thro’ whose curtains peeps no hellish nose,

				 				No wild-boar tushes, and no Mermaid’s toes;

				 				But flowers bursting out with lusty pride,

				 				And young Æolian harps personify’d;

				 				Some Titian colours touch’d into real life,⁠—

				 				The sacrifice goes on; the pontiff knife

				 				Gleams in the Sun, the milk-white heifer lows,

				 				The pipes go shrilly, the libation flows:

				 				A white sail shows above the green-head cliff,

				 				Moves round the point, and throws her anchor stiff;

				 				The mariners join hymn with those on land.



			 				You know the Enchanted Castle,⁠—it doth stand

				 				Upon a rock, on the border of a Lake,

				 				Nested in trees, which all do seem to shake

				 				From some old magic-like Urganda’s sword.

				 				O Phœbus! that I had thy sacred word

				 				To show this Castle, in fair dreaming wise,

				 				Unto my friend, while sick and ill he lies!



			 				You know it well enough, where it doth seem

				 				A mossy place, a Merlin’s Hall, a dream;

				 				You know the clear Lake, and the little Isles,

				 				The mountains blue, and cold near neighbour rills,

				 				All which elsewhere are but half animate;

				 				There do they look alive to love and hate,

				 				To smiles and frowns; they seem a lifted mound

				 				Above some giant, pulsing underground.



			 				Part of the building was a chosen See,

				 				Built by a banish’d Santon of Chaldee;

				 				The other part, two thousand years from him,

				 				Was built by Cuthbert de Saint Aldebrim;

				 				Then there’s a little wing, far from the Sun,

				 				Built by a Lapland Witch turn’d maudlin Nun;

				 				And many other juts of aged stone

				 				Founded with many a mason-devil’s groan.



			 				The doors all look as if they op’d themselves:

				 				The windows as if latch’d by Fays and Elves,

				 				And from them comes a silver flash of light,

				 				As from the westward of a Summer’s night;

				 				Or like a beauteous woman’s large blue eyes

				 				Gone mad through olden songs and poesies.



			 				See! what is coming from the distance dim!

				 				A golden Galley all in silken trim!

				 				Three rows of oars are lightning, moment whiles

				 				Into the verd’rous bosoms of those isles;

				 				Towards the shade, under the Castle wall,

				 				It comes in silence,⁠—now ’tis hidden all.

				 				The Clarion sounds, and from a Postern-gate

				 				An echo of sweet music doth create

				 				A fear in the poor Herdsman who doth bring

				 				His beasts to trouble the enchanted spring,⁠—

				 				He tells of the sweet music, and the spot,

				 				To all his friends, and they believe him not.



			 				O that our dreamings all, of sleep or wake,

				 				Would all their colours from the sunset take:

				 				From something of material sublime,

				 				Rather than shadow our own soul’s day-time

				 				In the dark void of night. For in the world

				 				We jostle,⁠—but my flag is not unfurl’d

				 				On the Admiral-staff⁠—and so philosophise

				 				I dare not yet! O, never will the prize,

				 				High reason, and the love of good and ill,

				 				Be my award! Things cannot to the will

				 				Be settled, but they tease us out of thought;

				 				Or is it imagination brought

				 				Beyond its proper bound, yet still confin’d,

				 				Lost in a sort of Purgatory blind,

				 				Cannot refer to any standard law

				 				Of either earth or heaven? It is a flaw

				 				In happiness, to see beyond our bourn.⁠—

				 				It forces us in summer skies to mourn,

				 				It spoils the singing of the Nightingale.



			 				Dear Reynolds! I have a mysterious tale,

				 				And cannot speak it: the first page I read

				 				Upon a Lampit rock of green sea-weed

				 				Among the breakers; ’twas a quiet eve,

				 				The rocks were silent, the wide sea did weave

				 				An untumultuous fringe of silver foam

				 				Along the flat brown sand; I was at home

				 				And should have been most happy,⁠—but I saw

				 				Too far into the sea, where every maw

				 				The greater on the less feeds evermore.⁠—

				 				But I saw too distinct into the core

				 				Of an eternal fierce destruction,

				 				And so from happiness I far was gone.

				 				Still am I sick of it, and tho’ to-day,

				 				I’ve gather’d young spring-leaves, and flowers gay

				 				Of periwinkle and wild strawberry,

				 				Still do I that most fierce destruction see,

				 				The Shark at savage prey,⁠—the Hawk at pounce,⁠—

				 				The gentle Robin, like a Pard or Ounce,

				 				Ravening a worm,⁠—Away, ye horrid moods!

				 				Moods of one’s mind! You know I hate them well.

				 				You know I’d sooner be a clapping Bell

				 				To some Kamschatkan Missionary Church,

				 				Than with these horrid moods be left i’ the lurch.





At Teignmouth


			 				Here all the summer could I stay,

				 				For there’s Bishop’s teign

				 				And King’s teign

				 				And Coomb at the clear teign head⁠—

				 				Where close by the stream

				 				You may have your cream

				 				All spread upon barley bread.



			 				There’s arch Brook

				 				And there’s larch Brook

				 				Both turning many a mill;

				 				And cooling the drouth

				 				Of the salmon’s mouth

				 				And fattening his silver gill.



			 				There is Wild wood,

				 				A Mild hood

				To the sheep on the lea o’ the down,

				 				Where the golden furze

				 				With its green, thin spurs,

				 				Doth catch at the maiden’s gown.



			 				There is Newton marsh

				 				With its spear grass harsh,⁠—

				 				A pleasant summer level

				 				Where the maidens sweet

				 				Of the Market Street,

				 				Do meet in the dusk to revel.



			 				There’s the Barton rich

				 				With dyke and ditch

				 				And hedge for the thrush to live in;

				 				And the hollow tree

				 				For the buzzing bee,

				 				And a bank for the wasp to hive in.



			 				And O, and O

				 				The daisies blow

				 				And the primroses are waken’d,

				 				And the violets white

				 				Sit in silver light,

				 				And the green bud’s as long as the spike end.



			 				Then who would go

				 				Into dark Soho,

				 				And chatter with dank’d hair’d critics,

				 				When he can stay

				 				For the new-mown hay,

				 				And startle the dappled crickets?





Fragment of an Ode to Maia


			 				Mother of Hermes! and still youthful Maia!

				 				May I sing to thee

				 				As thou wast hymned on the shores of Baiae?

				 				Or may I woo thee

				 				In earlier Sicilian? or thy smiles

				 				Seek as they once were sought, in Grecian isles,

				 				By bards who died content on pleasant sward,

				 				Leaving great verse unto a little clan?

				 				O, give me their old vigour, and unheard

				 				Save of the quiet Primrose, and the span

				 				Of heaven and few ears,

				 				Rounded by thee, my song should die away

				 				Content as theirs,

				 				Rich in the simple worship of a day.





				Isabella, or the Pot of Basil 				A Story from Boccaccio





I


				 					Fair Isabel, poor simple Isabel!

					 					Lorenzo, a young palmer in love’s eye!

					 					They could not in the self-same mansion dwell

					 					Without some stir of heart, some malady;

					 					They could not sit at meals but feel how well

					 					It soothed each to be the other by;

					 					They could not, sure, beneath the same roof sleep

					 					But to each other dream, and nightly weep.





II


				 					With every morn their love grew tenderer,

					 					With every eve deeper and tenderer still;

					 					He might not in house, field, or garden stir,

					 					But her full shape would all his seeing fill;

					 					And his continual voice was pleasanter

					 					To her, than noise of trees or hidden rill;

					 					Her lute-string gave an echo of his name,

					 					She spoilt her half-done broidery with the same.





III


				 					He knew whose gentle hand was at the latch,

					 					Before the door had given her to his eyes;

					 					And from her chamber-window he would catch

					 					Her beauty farther than the falcon spies;

					 					And constant as her vespers would he watch,

					 					Because her face was turn’d to the same skies;

					 					And with sick longing all the night outwear,

					 					To hear her morning-step upon the stair.





IV


				 					A whole long month of May in this sad plight

					 					Made their cheeks paler by the break of June:

					 					“To-morrow will I bow to my delight,

					 					To-morrow will I ask my lady’s boon.”⁠—

					 					“O may I never see another night,

					 					Lorenzo, if thy lips breathe not love’s tune.”⁠—

					 					So spake they to their pillows; but, alas,

					 					Honeyless days and days did he let pass;





V


				 					Until sweet Isabella’s untouch’d cheek

					 					Fell sick within the rose’s just domain,

					 					Fell thin as a young mother’s, who doth seek

					 					By every lull to cool her infant’s pain:

					 					“How ill she is!” said he, “I may not speak,

					 					And yet I will, and tell my love all plain:

					 					If looks speak love-laws, I will drink her tears,

					 					And at the least ’twill startle off her cares.





VI


				 					So said he one fair morning, and all day

					 					His heart beat awfully against his side;

					 					And to his heart he inwardly did pray

					 					For power to speak; but still the ruddy tide

					 					Stifled his voice, and pulsed resolve away⁠—

					 					Fever’d his high conceit of such a bride,

					 					Yet brought him to the meekness of a child:

					 					Alas! when passion is both meek and wild!





VII


				 					So once more he had waked and anguished

					 					A dreary night of love and misery,

					 					If Isabel’s quick eye had not been wed

					 					To every symbol on his forehead high:

					 					She saw it waxing very pale and dead,

					 					And straight all flush’d; so, lisped tenderly,

					 					“Lorenzo!”⁠—here she ceased her timid quest,

					 					But in her tone and look he read the rest.





VIII


				 					“O Isabella, I can half perceive

					 					That I may speak my grief into thine ear;

					 					If thou didst ever anything believe,

					 					Believe how I love thee, believe how near

					 					My soul is to its doom: I would not grieve

					 					Thy hand by unwelcome pressing, would not fear

					 					Thine eyes by gazing; but I cannot live

					 					Another night, and not my passion shrive.





IX


				 					“Love! thou art leading me from wintry cold,

					 					Lady! thou leadest me to summer clime,

					 					And I must taste the blossoms that unfold

					 					In its ripe warmth this gracious morning time.”

					 					So said, his erewhile timid lips grew bold.

					 					And poesied with hers in dewy rhyme:

					 					Great bliss was with them, and great happiness

					 					Grew, like a lusty flower in June’s caress.





X


				 					Parting they seem’d to tread upon the air,

					 					Twin roses by the zephyr blown apart

					 					Only to meet again more close, and share

					 					The inward fragrance of each other’s heart.

					 					She, to her chamber gone, a ditty fair

					 					Sang, of delicious love and honey’d dart;

					 					He with light steps went up a western hill,

					 					And bade the sun farewell, and joy’d his fill.





XI


				 					All close they met again, before the dusk

					 					Had taken from the stars its pleasant veil,

					 					All close they met, all eves, before the dusk

					 					Had taken from the stars its pleasant veil,

					 					Close in a bower of hyacinth and musk,

					 					Unknown of any, free from whispering tale.

					 					Ah! better had it been forever so,

					 					Than idle ears should pleasure in their woe.





XII


				 					Were they unhappy then?⁠—It cannot be⁠—

					 					Too many tears for lovers have been shed,

					 					Too many sighs give we to them in fee,

					 					Too much of pity after they are dead,

					 					Too many doleful stories do we see,

					 					Whose matter in bright gold were best be read;

					 					Except in such a page where Theseus’ spouse

					 					Over the pathless waves towards him bows.





XIII


				 					But, for the general award of love,

					 					The little sweet doth kill much bitterness;

					 					Though Dido silent is in under-grove,

					 					And Isabella’s was a great distress,

					 					Though young Lorenzo in warm Indian clove

					 					Was not embalm’d, this truth is not the less⁠—

					 					Even bees, the little almsmen of spring-bowers,

					 					Know there is richest juice in poison-flowers.





XIV


				 					With her two brothers this fair lady dwelt,

					 					Enriched from ancestral merchandise,

					 					And for them many a weary hand did swelt

					 					In torched mines and noisy factories,

					 					And many once proud-quiver’d loins did melt

					 					In blood from stinging whip;⁠—with hollow eyes

					 					Many all day in dazzling river stood,

					 					To take the rich-ored driftings of the flood.





XV


				 					For them the Ceylon diver held his breath,

					 					And went all naked to the hungry shark;

					 					For them his ears gush’d blood; for them in death

					 					The seal on the cold ice with piteous bark

					 					Lay full of darts; for them alone did seethe

					 					A thousand men in troubles wide and dark:

					 					Half-ignorant, they turn’d an easy wheel,

					 					That set sharp racks at work, to pinch and peel.





XVI


				 					Why were they proud? Because their marble founts

					 					Gush’d with more pride than do a wretch’s tears?⁠—

					 					Why were they proud? Because fair orange-mounts

					 					Were of more soft ascent than lazar stairs?⁠—

					 					Why were they proud? Because red-lined accounts

					 					Were richer than the songs of Grecian years?⁠—

					 					Why were they proud? again we ask aloud,

					 					Why in the name of Glory were they proud?





XVII


				 					Yet were these Florentines as self-retired

					 					In hungry pride and gainful cowardice,

					 					As two close Hebrews in that land inspired,

					 					Paled in and vineyarded from beggar-spies;

					 					The hawks of ship-mast forests⁠—the untired

					 					And pannier’d mules for ducats and old lies⁠—

					 					Quick cat’s-paws on the generous stray-away,⁠—

					 					Great wits in Spanish, Tuscan, and Malay.





XVIII


				 					How was it these same ledger-men could spy

					 					Fair Isabella in her downy nest?

					 					How could they find out in Lorenzo’s eye

					 					A straying from his toil? Hot Egypt’s pest

					 					Into their vision covetous and sly!

					 					How could these money-bags see east and west?⁠—

					 					Yet so they did⁠—and every dealer fair

					 					Must see behind, as doth the hunted hare.





XIX


				 					O eloquent and famed Boccaccio!

					 					Of thee we now should ask forgiving boon,

					 					And of thy spicy myrtles as they blow,

					 					And of thy roses amorous of the moon,

					 					And of thy lilies, that do paler grow

					 					Now they can no more hear thy ghittern’s tune,

					 					For venturing syllables that ill beseem

					 					The quiet glooms of such a piteous theme.





XX


				 					Grant thou a pardon here, and then the tale

					 					Shall move on soberly, as it is meet;

					 					There is no other crime, no mad assail

					 					To make old prose in modern rhyme more sweet:

					 					But it is done⁠—succeed the verse or fail⁠—

					 					To honour thee, and thy gone spirit greet;

					 					To stead thee as a verse in English tongue,

					 					An echo of thee in the north-wind sung.





XXI


				 					These brethren having found by many signs

					 					What love Lorenzo for their sister had,

					 					And how she loved him too, each unconfines

					 					His bitter thoughts to other, well-nigh mad

					 					That he, the servant of their trade designs,

					 					Should in their sister’s love be blithe and glad,

					 					When ’twas their plan to coax her by degrees

					 					To some high noble and his olive-trees.





XXII


				 					And many a jealous conference had they,

					 					And many times they bit their lips alone,

					 					Before they fix’d upon a surest way

					 					To make the youngster for his crime atone;

					 					And at the last, these men of cruel clay

					 					Cut Mercy with a sharp knife to the bone;

					 					For they resolved in some forest dim

					 					To kill Lorenzo, and there bury him.





XXIII


				 					So on a pleasant morning, as he leant

					 					Into the sunrise, o’er the balustrade

					 					Of the garden-terrace, towards him they bent

					 					Their footing through the dews; and to him said,

					 					“You seem there in the quiet of content,

					 					Lorenzo, and we are most loth to invade

					 					Calm speculation; but if you are wise,

					 					Bestride your steed while cold is in the skies.





XXIV


				 					“To-day we purpose, aye, this hour we mount

					 					To spur three leagues towards the Apennine;

					 					Come down, we pray thee, ere the hot sun count

					 					His dewy rosary on the eglantine.”

					 					Lorenzo, courteously as he was wont,

					 					Bow’d a fair greeting to these serpents’ whine;

					 					And went in haste, to get in readiness,

					 					With belt, and spur, and bracing huntsman’s dress.





XXV


				 					And as he to the court-yard pass’d along,

					 					Each third step did he pause, and listen’d oft

					 					If he could hear his lady’s matin-song,

					 					Or the light whisper of her footstep soft;

					 					And as he thus over his passion hung,

					 					He heard a laugh full musical aloft;

					 					When, looking up, he saw her features bright

					 					Smile through an in-door lattice, all delight.





XXVI


				 					“Love, Isabel!” said he, “I was in pain

					 					Lest I should miss to bid thee a good morrow:

					 					Ah! what if I should lose thee, when so fain

					 					I am to stifle all the heavy sorrow

					 					Of a poor three hours’ absence? but we’ll gain

					 					Out of the amorous dark what day doth borrow.

					 					Good bye! I’ll soon be back.”⁠—“Good bye!” said she:⁠—

					 					And as he went she chanted merrily.





XXVII


				 					So the two brothers and their murder’d man

					 					Rode past fair Florence, to where Arno’s stream

					 					Gurgles through straighten’d banks, and still doth fan

					 					Itself with dancing bulrush, and the bream

					 					Keeps head against the freshets. Sick and wan

					 					The brothers’ faces in the ford did seem,

					 					Lorenzo’s flush with love.⁠—They pass’d the water

					 					Into a forest quiet for the slaughter.





XXVIII


				 					There was Lorenzo slain and buried in,

					 					There in that forest did his great love cease;

					 					Ah! when a soul doth thus its freedom win,

					 					It aches in loneliness⁠—is ill at peace

					 					As the break-covert bloodhounds of such sin:

					 					They dipp’d their swords in the water, and did tease

					 					Their horses homeward, with convulsed spur,

					 					Each richer by his being a murderer.





XXIX


				 					They told their sister how, with sudden speed,

					 					Lorenzo had ta’en ship for foreign lands,

					 					Because of some great urgency and need

					 					In their affairs, requiring trusty hands.

					 					Poor Girl! put on thy stifling widow’s weed,

					 					And ’scape at once from Hope’s accursed bands:

					 					To-day thou wilt not see him, nor to-morrow,

					 					And the next day will be a day of sorrow.





XXX


				 					She weeps alone for pleasures not to be;

					 					Sorely she wept until the night came on,

					 					And then, instead of love, O misery!

					 					She brooded o’er the luxury alone:

					 					His image in the dusk she seem’d to see,

					 					And to the silence made a gentle moan,

					 					Spreading her perfect arms upon the air,

					 					And on her couch low murmuring, “Where? O where?”





XXXI


				 					But Selfishness, Love’s cousin, held not long

					 					Its fiery vigil in her single breast;

					 					She fretted for the golden hour, and hung

					 					Upon the time with feverish unrest⁠—

					 					Not long⁠—for soon into her heart a throng

					 					Of higher occupants, a richer zest,

					 					Came tragic; passion not to be subdued,

					 					And sorrow for her love in travels rude.





XXXII


				 					In the mid days of autumn, on their eves

					 					The breath of Winter comes from far away,

					 					And the sick west continually bereaves

					 					Of some gold tinge, and plays a roundelay

					 					Of death among the bushes and the leaves,

					 					To make all bare before he dares to stray

					 					From his north cavern. So sweet Isabel

					 					By gradual decay from beauty fell,





XXXIII


				 					Because Lorenzo came not. Oftentimes

					 					She ask’d her brothers, with an eye all pale,

					 					Striving to be itself, what dungeon climes

					 					Could keep him off so long? They spake a tale

					 					Time after time, to quiet her. Their crimes

					 					Came on them, like a smoke from Hinnom’s vale;

					 					And every night in dreams they groan’d aloud,

					 					To see their sister in her snowy shroud.





XXXIV


				 					And she had died in drowsy ignorance,

					 					But for a thing more deadly dark than all;

					 					It came like a fierce potion, drunk by chance,

					 					Which saves a sick man from the feather’d pall

					 					For some few gasping moments; like a lance,

					 					Waking an Indian from his cloudy hall

					 					With cruel pierce, and bringing him again

					 					Sense of the gnawing fire at heart and brain.





XXXV


				 					It was a vision.⁠—In the drowsy gloom,

					 					The dull of midnight, at her couch’s foot

					 					Lorenzo stood, and wept: the forest tomb

					 					Had marr’d his glossy hair which once could shoot

					 					Lustre into the sun, and put cold doom

					 					Upon his lips, and taken the soft lute

					 					From his lorn voice, and past his loamed ears

					 					Had made a miry channel for his tears.





XXXVI


				 					Strange sound it was, when the pale shadow spake;

					 					For there was striving, in its piteous tongue,

					 					To speak as when on earth it was awake,

					 					And Isabella on its music hung:

					 					Languor there was in it, and tremulous shake,

					 					As in a palsied Druid’s harp unstrung;

					 					And through it moan’d a ghostly undersong,

					 					Like hoarse night-gusts sepulchral briars among.





XXXVII


				 					Its eyes, though wild, were still all dewy bright

					 					With love, and kept all phantom fear aloof

					 					From the poor girl by magic of their light,

					 					The while it did unthread the horrid woof

					 					Of the late darken’d time,⁠—the murderous spite

					 					Of pride and avarice,⁠—the dark pine roof

					 					In the forest,⁠—and the sodden turfed dell,

					 					Where, without any word, from stabs he fell.





XXXVIII


				 					Saying moreover, “Isabel, my sweet

					 					Red whortleberries droop above my head,

					 					And a large flint-stone weighs upon my feet;

					 					Around me beeches and high chestnuts shed

					 					Their leaves and prickly nuts; a sheepfold bleat

					 					Comes from beyond the river to my bed:

					 					Go, shed one tear upon my heather-bloom,

					 					And it shall comfort me within the tomb.





XXXIX


				 					“I am a shadow now, alas! alas!

					 					Upon the skirts of human nature dwelling

					 					Alone: I chant alone the holy mass,

					 					While little sounds of life are round me knelling,

					 					And glossy bees at noon do fieldward pass,

					 					And many a chapel bell the hour is telling,

					 					Paining me through: those sounds grow strange to me,

					 					And thou art distant in Humanity.





XL


				 					“I know what was, I feel full well what is,

					 					And I should rage, if spirits could go mad;

					 					Though I forget the taste of earthly bliss,

					 					That paleness warms my grave, as though I had

					 					A Seraph chosen from the bright abyss

					 					To be my spouse: thy paleness makes me glad;

					 					Thy beauty grows upon me, and I feel

					 					A greater love through all my essence steal.”





XLI


				 					The Spirit mourn’d “Adieu!”⁠—dissolved, and left

					 					The atom darkness in a slow turmoil;

					 					As when of healthful midnight sleep bereft,

					 					Thinking on rugged hours and fruitless toil,

					 					We put our eyes into a pillowy cleft,

					 					And see the spangly gloom froth up and boil:

					 					It made sad Isabella’s eyelids ache,

					 					And in the dawn she started up awake.





XLII


				 					“Ha! ha!” said she, “I knew not this hard life,

					 					I thought the worst was simple misery;

					 					I thought some Fate with pleasure or with strife

					 					Portion’d us⁠—happy days, or else to die;

					 					But there is crime⁠—a brother’s bloody knife!

					 					Sweet Spirit, thou hast school’d my infancy:

					 					I’ll visit thee for this, and kiss thine eyes,

					 					And greet thee morn and even in the skies.”





XLIII


				 					When the full morning came, she had devised

					 					How she might secret to the forest hie;

					 					How she might find the clay, so dearly prized,

					 					And sing to it one latest lullaby;

					 					How her short absence might be unsurmised,

					 					While she the inmost of the dream would try.

					 					Resolved, she took with her an aged nurse,

					 					And went into that dismal forest-hearse.





XLIV


				 					See, as they creep along the river side,

					 					How she doth whisper to that aged Dame,

					 					And, after looking round the champaign wide,

					 					Shows her a knife.⁠—“What feverous hectic flame

					 					Burns in thee, child?⁠—what good can thee betide,

					 					That thou shouldst smile again?”⁠—The evening came,

					 					And they had found Lorenzo’s earthy bed;

					 					The flint was there, the berries at his head.





XLV


				 					Who hath not loiter’d in a green churchyard,

					 					And let his spirit, like a demon-mole,

					 					Work through the clayey soil and gravel hard,

					 					To see skull, coffin’d bones, and funeral stole;

					 					Pitying each form that hungry Death hath marr’d,

					 					And filling it once more with human soul?

					 					Ah! this is holiday to what was felt

					 					When Isabella by Lorenzo knelt.





XLVI


				 					She gazed into the fresh-thrown mould, as though

					 					One glance did fully all its secrets tell;

					 					Clearly she saw, as other eyes would know

					 					Pale limbs at bottom of a crystal well;

					 					Upon the murderous spot she seem’d to grow,

					 					Like to a native lily of the dell:

					 					Then with her knife, all sudden, she began

					 					To dig more fervently than misers can.





XLVII


				 					Soon she turn’d up a soiled glove, whereon

					 					Her silk had play’d in purple phantasies:

					 					She kiss’d it with a lip more chill than stone,

					 					And put it in her bosom, where it dries

					 					And freezes utterly unto the bone

					 					Those dainties made to still an infant’s cries;

					 					Then ’gan she work again; nor stay’d her care,

					 					But to throw back at times her veiling hair.





XLVIII


				 					That old nurse stood beside her wondering,

					 					Until her heart felt pity to the core

					 					At sight of such a dismal labouring,

					 					And so she kneeled, with her locks all hoar,

					 					And put her lean hands to the horrid thing:

					 					Three hours they labour’d at this travail sore:

					 					At last they felt the kernel of the grave,

					 					And Isabella did not stamp and rave.





XLIX


				 					Ah! wherefore all this wormy circumstance?

					 					Why linger at the yawning tomb so long?

					 					O for the gentleness of old Romance,

					 					The simple plaining of a minstrel’s song!

					 					Fair reader, at the old tale take a glance,

					 					For here, in truth, it doth not well belong

					 					To speak:⁠—O turn thee to the very tale,

					 					And taste the music of that vision pale.





L


				 					With duller steel than the Perséan sword

					 					They cut away no formless monster’s head,

					 					But one, whose gentleness did well accord

					 					With death, as life. The ancient harps have said,

					 					Love never dies, but lives, immortal Lord:

					 					If Love impersonate was ever dead,

					 					Pale Isabella kiss’d it, and low moan’d.

					 					’Twas love; cold,⁠—dead indeed, but not dethron’d.





LI


				 					In anxious secrecy they took it home,

					 					And then the prize was all for Isabel:

					 					She calm’d its wild hair with a golden comb,

					 					And all around each eye’s sepulchral cell

					 					Pointed each fringed lash; the smeared loam

					 					With tears, as chilly as a dripping well,

					 					She drench’d away: and still she comb’d, and kept

					 					Sighing all day⁠—and still she kiss’d and wept.





LII


				 					Then in a silken scarf,⁠—sweet with the dews

					 					Of precious flowers pluck’d in Araby,

					 					And divine liquids come with odorous ooze

					 					Through the cold serpent-pipe refreshfully,⁠—

					 					She wrapp’d it up; and for its tomb did choose

					 					A garden-pot, wherein she laid it by,

					 					And cover’d it with mould, and o’er it set

					 					Sweet Basil, which her tears kept ever wet.





LIII


				 					And she forgot the stars, the moon, and sun,

					 					And she forgot the blue above the trees,

					 					And she forgot the dells where waters run,

					 					And she forgot the chilly autumn breeze;

					 					She had no knowledge when the day was done,

					 					And the new morn she saw not: but in peace

					 					Hung over her sweet Basil evermore,

					 					And moisten’d it with tears unto the core.





LIV


				 					And so she ever fed it with thin tears,

					 					Whence thick, and green, and beautiful it grew,

					 					So that it smelt more balmy than its peers

					 					Of Basil-tufts in Florence; for it drew

					 					Nurture besides, and life, from human fears,

					 					From the fast mouldering head there shut from view:

					 					So that the jewel, safely casketed,

					 					Came forth, and in perfumed leafits spread.





LV


				 					O Melancholy, linger here awhile!

					 					O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!

					 					O Echo, Echo, from some sombre isle,

					 					Unknown, Lethean, sigh to us⁠—O sigh!

					 					Spirits in grief, lift up your heads, and smile;

					 					Lift up your heads, sweet Spirits, heavily,

					 					And make a pale light in your cypress glooms,

					 					Tinting with silver wan your marble tombs.





LVI


				 					Moan hither, all ye syllables of woe,

					 					From the deep throat of sad Melpomene!

					 					Through bronzed lyre in tragic order go,

					 					And touch the strings into a mystery;

					 					Sound mournfully upon the winds and low;

					 					For simple Isabel is soon to be

					 					Among the dead: She withers, like a palm

					 					Cut by an Indian for its juicy balm.





LVII


				 					O leave the palm to wither by itself;

					 					Let not quick Winter chill its dying hour!⁠—

					 					It may not be⁠—those Baälites of pelf,

					 					Her brethren, noted the continual shower

					 					From her dead eyes: and many a curious elf,

					 					Among her kindred, wonder’d that such dower

					 					Of youth and beauty should be thrown aside

					 					By one mark’d out to be a Noble’s bride.





LVIII


				 					And, furthermore, her brethren wonder’d much

					 					Why she sat drooping by the Basil green,

					 					And why it flourish’d, as by magic touch;

					 					Greatly they wonder’d what the thing might mean:

					 					They could not surely give belief, that such

					 					A very nothing would have power to wean

					 					Her from her own fair youth, and pleasures gay,

					 					And even remembrance of her love’s delay.





LIX


				 					Therefore they watch’d a time when they might sift

					 					This hidden whim; and long they watch’d in vain;

					 					For seldom did she go to chapel-shrift,

					 					And seldom felt she any hunger-pain:

					 					And when she left, she hurried back, as swift

					 					As bird on wing to breast its eggs again:

					 					And, patient as a hen-bird, sat her there

					 					Beside her Basil, weeping through her hair.





LX


				 					Yet they contrived to steal the Basil-pot,

					 					And to examine it in secret place:

					 					The thing was vile with green and livid spot,

					 					And yet they knew it was Lorenzo’s face:

					 					The guerdon of their murder they had got,

					 					And so left Florence in a moment’s space,

					 					Never to turn again.⁠—Away they went,

					 					With blood upon their heads, to banishment.





LXI


				 					O Melancholy, turn thine eyes away!

					 					O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!

					 					O Echo, Echo, on some other day,

					 					From isles Lethean, sigh to us⁠—O sigh!

					 					Spirits of grief, sing not your “Well-a-way!”

					 					For Isabel, sweet Isabel, will die;

					 					Will die a death too lone and incomplete,

					 					Now they have ta’en away her Basil sweet.





LXII


				 					Piteous she look’d on dead and senseless things,

					 					Asking for her lost Basil amorously:

					 					And with melodious chuckle in the strings

					 					Of her lorn voice, she oftentimes would cry

					 					After the Pilgrim in his wanderings,

					 					To ask him where her Basil was; and why

					 					’Twas hid from her: “For cruel ’tis,” said she,

					 					“To steal my Basil-pot away from me.”





LXIII


				 					And so she pined, and so she died forlorn,

					 					Imploring for her Basil to the last.

					 					No heart was there in Florence but did mourn

					 					In pity of her love, so overcast.

					 					And a sad ditty of this story born

					 					From mouth to mouth through all the country pass’d:

					 					Still is the burthen sung⁠—“O cruelty,

					 					To steal my Basil-pot away from me!”





An Extempore




Canto the XII


				 					When they were come into the Faery’s Court

					 					They rang⁠—no one at home⁠—all gone to sport

					 					And dance and kiss and love as faeries do

					 					For Faeries be as humans lovers true.

					 					Amid the woods they were so lone and wild,

					 					Where even the Robin feels himself exil’d,

					 					And where the very brooks, as if afraid,

					 					Hurry along to some less magic shade.

					 					“No one at home!” the fretful Princess cry’d;

					 					“And all for nothing such a dreary ride,

					 					And all for nothing my new diamond cross;

					 					No one to see my Persian feathers toss,

					 					No one to see my Ape, my Dwarf, my Fool,

					 					Or how I pace my Otaheitan mule.

					 					Ape, Dwarf, and Fool, why stand you gaping there,

					 					Burst the door open, quick⁠—or I declare

					 					I’ll switch you soundly and in pieces tear.”

					 					The Dwarf began to tremble, and the Ape

					 					Star’d at the Fool, the Fool was all agape,

					 					The Princess grasp’d her switch, but just in time

					 					The dwarf with piteous face began to rhyme.

					 					“O mighty Princess, did you ne’er hear tell

					 					What your poor servants know but too too well?

					 					Know you the three great crimes in Faeryland?

					 					The first, alas! poor Dwarf, I understand,

					 					I made a whipstock of a faery’s wand;

					 					The next is snoring in their company;

					 					The next, the last, the direst of the three,

					 					Is making free when they are not at home.

					 					I was a Prince⁠—a baby prince⁠—my doom,

					 					You see, I made a whipstock of a wand,

					 					My top has henceforth slept in faery land.

					 					He was a Prince, the Fool, a grown-up Prince,

					 					But he has never been a King’s son since

					 					He fell a snoring at a faery Ball.

					 					Yon poor Ape was a Prince, and he poor thing

					 					Picklock’d a faery’s boudoir⁠—now no king

					 					But ape⁠—so pray your highness stay awhile,

					 					’Tis sooth indeed, we know it to our sorrow⁠—

					 					Persist and you may be an ape to-morrow.”

					 					While the Dwarf spake, the Princess, all for spite,

					 					Peel’d the brown hazel twig to lily white,

					 					Clench’d her small teeth, and held her lips apart,

					 					Try’d to look unconcern’d with beating heart.

					 					They saw her highness had made up her mind,

					 					A-quavering like the reeds before the wind⁠—

					 					And they had had it, but O happy chance!

					 					The Ape for very fear began to dance

					 					And grinn’d as all his ugliness did ache⁠—

					 					She staid her vixen fingers for his sake,

					 					He was so very ugly: then she took

					 					Her pocket-mirror and began to look

					 					First at herself and then at him, and then

					 					She smil’d at her own beauteous face again.

					 					Yet for all this⁠—for all her pretty face⁠—

					 					She took it in her head to see the place.

					 					Women gain little from experience

					 					Either in Lovers, husbands, or expense.

					 					The more their beauty the more fortune too⁠—

					 					Beauty before the wide world never knew⁠—

					 					So each fair reasons⁠—tho’ it oft miscarries.

					 					She thought her pretty face would please the faeries.

					 					“My darling Ape, I wont whip you to-day,

					 					Give me the Picklock sirrah and go play.”

					 					They all three wept but counsel was as vain

					 					As crying cup biddy to drops of rain.

					 					Yet lingering by did the sad Ape forth draw

					 					The Picklock from the Pocket in his Jaw.

					 					The Princess took it, and dismounting straight

					 					Tripp’d in blue silver’d slippers to the gate

					 					And touch’d the wards, the Door full courteous

					 					Opened⁠—she enter’d with her servants three.

					 					Again it clos’d and there was nothing seen

					 					But the Mule grazing on the herbage green.





Canto the XIII


				 					The Mule no sooner saw himself alone

					 					Than he prick’d up his Ears⁠—and said “well done;

					 					At least unhappy Prince I may be free⁠—

					 					No more a Princess shall side-saddle me.

					 					O King of Otaheite⁠—tho’ a Mule,

					 					‘Aye, every inch a King’⁠—tho’ ‘Fortune’s Fool,’

					 					Well done⁠—for by what Mr. Dwarfy said

					 					I would not give a sixpence for her head.”

					 					Even as he spake he trotted in high glee

					 					To the knotty side of an old Pollard tree,

					 					And rubb’d his sides against the mossed bark

					 					Till his Girths burst and left him naked stark

					 					Except his Bridle⁠—how get rid of that

					 					Buckled and tied with many a twist and plait.

					 					At last it struck him to pretend to sleep,

					 					And then the thievish Monkeys down would creep

					 					And filch the unpleasant trammels quite away.

					 					No sooner thought of than adown he lay,

					 					Shamm’d a good snore⁠—the Monkey-men descended

					 					And whom they thought to injure they befriended.

					 					They hung his Bridle on a topmost bough

					 					And off he went run, trot, or anyhow⁠—





Spenserian Stanzas on Charles Armitage Brown


			 				He is to weet a melancholy Carle:

				 				Thin in the waist, with bushy head of hair,

				 				As hath the seeded thistle when in parle

				 				It holds the Zephyr, ere it sendeth fair

				 				Its light balloons into the summer air;

				 				There to his beard had not begun to bloom,

				 				No brush had touch’d his chin, or razor sheer;

				 				No care had touched his cheek with mortal doom,

				 				But new he was, and bright, as scarf from Persian loom.



			 				Ne cared he for wine, or half-and-half;

				 				Ne cared he for fish, or flesh, or fowl;

				 				And sauces held he worthless as the chaff;

				 				He’s deigned the swineherd at the wassail bowl;

				 				Ne with lewd ribbalds sat he cheek by jowl;

				 				Ne with sly Lemans in the scorner’s chair;

				 				But after water-brooks this Pilgrim’s soul

				 				Panted, and all his food was woodland air;

				 				Though he would oft-times feast on gilliflowers rare.



			 				The slang of cities in no wise he knew;

				 				Tipping the wink to him was heathen Greek;

				 				He sipp’d no “olden Tom,” or “ruin blue,”

				 				Or Nantz, or cherry-brandy, drunk full meek

				 				By many a Damsel hoarse, and rouge of cheek;

				 				Nor did he know each aged Watchman’s beat,

				 				Nor in obscured purlieus would he seek

				 				For curled Jewesses, with ankles neat,

				 				Who, as they walk abroad, make tinkling with their feet.





Two or Three Posies


			 				Two or three Posies

				 				With two or three simples⁠—

				 				Two or three Noses

				 				With two or three pimples⁠—

				 				Two or three wise men

				 				And two or three ninny’s⁠—

				 				Two or three purses

				 				And two or three guineas⁠—

				 				Two or three raps

				 				At two or three doors⁠—

				 				Two or three naps

				 				Of two or three hours⁠—

				 				Two or three Cats

				 				And two or three mice⁠—

				 				Two or three sprats

				 				At a very great price⁠—

				 				Two or three sandies

				 				And two or three tabbies⁠—

				 				Two or three dandies

				 				And two Mrs. ⸺⁠mum!

				 				Two or three Smiles

				 				And two or three frowns⁠—

				 				Two or three Miles

				 				To two or three towns⁠—

				 				Two or three pegs

				 				For two or three bonnets⁠—

				 				Two or three dove eggs

				 				To hatch into sonnets⁠—





				Acrostic 				Georgiana Augusta Keats




			 				Give me your patience, sister, while I frame

				 				Exact in capitals your golden name;

				 				Or sue the fair Apollo and he will

				 				Rouse from his heavy slumber and instill

				 				Great love in me for thee and Poesy.

				 				Imagine not that greatest mastery

				 				And kingdom over all the Realms of verse,

				 				Nears more to heaven in aught, than when we nurse

				 				And surety give to love and Brotherhood.



			 				Anthropophagi in Othello’s mood;

				 				Ulysses storm’d and his enchanted belt

				 				Glow with the Muse, but they are never felt

				 				Unbosom’d so and so eternal made,

				 				Such tender incense in their laurel shade

				 				To all the regent sisters of the Nine

				 				As this poor offering to you, sister mine.



			 				Kind sister! ay, this third name says you are;

				 				Enchanted has it been the Lord knows where;

				 				And may it taste to you like good old wine,

				 				Take you to real happiness and give

				 				Sons, daughters and a home like honied hive.





A Song About Myself


			 				There was a naughty Boy,

				 				A naughty boy was he,

				 				He would not stop at home,

				 				He could not quiet be⁠—

				 				He took

				 				In his Knapsack

				 				A Book

				 				Full of vowels;

				 				And a shirt

				 				With some towels⁠—

				 				A slight cap

				 				For night cap⁠—

				 				A hair brush,

				 				Comb ditto,

				 				New Stockings,

				 				For old ones

				 				Would split O!

				 				This Knapsack,

				 				Tight at ’s back,

				 				He rivetted close

				 				And follow’d his Nose

				 				To the North,

				 				To the North,

				 				And follow’d his nose

				 				To the North.



			 				There was a naughty boy

				 				And a naughty boy was he,

				 				For nothing would he do

				 				But scribble poetry⁠—

				 				He took

				 				An inkstand

				 				In his hand,

				 				And a Pen

				 				Big as ten

				 				In the other,

				 				And away

				 				In a Pother

				 				He ran

				 				To the mountains,

				 				And fountains

				 				And ghostes,

				 				And Postes,

				 				And witches,

				 				And ditches,

				 				And wrote

				 				In his coat,

				 				When the weather

				 				Was cool,

				 				Fear of gout,

				 				And without

				 				When the weather

				 				Was warm⁠—

				 				Och the charm

				 				When we choose

				 				To follow one’s nose

				 				To the north,

				 				To the north,

				 				To follow one’s nose

				 				To the north.



			 				There was a naughty boy

				 				And a naughty boy was he,

				 				He kept little fishes

				 				In washing tubs three

				 				In spite

				 				Of the might

				 				Of the Maid,

				 				Nor afraid

				 				Of his Granny⁠—good⁠—

				 				He often would,

				 				Hurly burly,

				 				Get up early,

				 				And go

				 				By hook or crook

				 				To the brook,

				 				And bring home

				 				Miller’s thumb,

				 				Tittlebat

				 				Not over fat,

				 				Minnows small

				 				As the stall

				 				Of a glove,

				 				Not above

				 				The size

				 				Of a nice

				 				Little Baby’s

				 				Little fingers⁠—

				 				O, he made,

				 				’Twas his trade,

				 				Of Fish a pretty Kettle

				 				A Kettle⁠—

				 				A Kettle

				 				Of Fish, a pretty Kettle,

				 				A Kettle!



			 				There was a naughty Boy,

				 				And a naughty Boy was he,

				 				He ran away to Scotland

				 				The people for to see⁠—

				 				Then he found

				 				That the ground

				 				Was as hard,

				 				That a yard

				 				Was as long,

				 				That a song

				 				Was as merry,

				 				That a cherry

				 				Was as red⁠—

				 				That lead

				 				Was as weighty,

				 				That fourscore

				 				Was as eighty,

				 				That a door

				 				Was as wooden

				 				As in England⁠—

				 				So he stood in his shoes

				 				And he wonder’d,

				 				He wonder’d,

				 				He stood in his shoes

				 				And he wonder’d.





On Visiting the Tomb of Burns


			 				The Town, the churchyard, and the setting sun,

				 				The Clouds, the trees, the rounded hills all seem,

				 				Though beautiful, cold⁠—strange⁠—as in a dream,

				 				I dreamed long ago, now new begun.

				 				The short lived, paly Summer is but won

				 				From Winter’s ague, for one hour’s gleam;

				 				Though sapphire-warm, their Stars do never beam:

				 				All is cold Beauty; pain is never done:

				 				For who has mind to relish, Minos-wise,

				 				The Real of Beauty, free from that dead hue

				 				Sickly imagination and sick pride

				 				Cast wan upon it! Burns! with honour due

				 				I oft have honour’d thee. Great shadow, hide

				 				Thy face; I sin against thy native skies.





Meg Merrilies


			 				Old Meg she was a Gipsy,

				 				And liv’d upon the Moors:

				 				Her bed it was the brown heath turf,

				 				And her house was out of doors.



			 				Her apples were swart blackberries,

				 				Her currants pods o’ broom;

				 				Her wine was dew of the wild white rose,

				 				Her book a churchyard tomb.



			 				Her Brothers were the craggy hills,

				 				Her Sisters larchen trees⁠—

				 				Alone with her great family

				 				She liv’d as she did please.



			 				No breakfast had she many a morn,

				 				No dinner many a noon,

				 				And ’stead of supper she would stare

				 				Full hard against the Moon.



			 				But every morn of woodbine fresh

				 				She made her garlanding,

				 				And every night the dark glen Yew

				 				She wove, and she would sing.



			 				And with her fingers old and brown

				 				She plaited Mats o’ Rushes,

				 				And gave them to the Cottagers

				 				She met among the Bushes,



			 				Old Meg was brave as Margaret Queen

				 				And tall as Amazon:

				 				An old red blanket coat she wore;

				 				A chip hat had she on.

				 				God rest her aged bones somewhere⁠—

				 				She died full long agone!





To Ailsa Rock


			 				Hearken, thou craggy ocean pyramid!

				 				Give answer from thy voice, the sea-fowls’ screams!

				 				When were thy shoulders mantled in huge streams?

				 				When, from the sun, was thy broad forehead hid?

				 				How long is ’t since the mighty power bid

				 				Thee heave to airy sleep from fathom dreams?

				 				Sleep in the lap of thunder or sunbeams,

				 				Or when gray clouds are thy cold coverlid.

				 				Thou answer’st not; for thou art dead asleep;

				 				Thy life is but two dead eternities⁠—

				 				The last in air, the former in the deep;

				 				First with the whales, last with the eagle-skies⁠—

				 				Drown’d wast thou till an earthquake made thee steep,

				 				Another cannot wake thy giant size.





Written in the Cottage Where Burns Was Born


			 				This mortal body of a thousand days

				 				Now fills, O Burns, a space in thine own room,

				 				Where thou didst dream alone on budded bays,

				 				Happy and thoughtless of thy day of doom!

				 				My pulse is warm with thine old Barley-bree,

				 				My head is light with pledging a great soul,

				 				My eyes are wandering, and I cannot see,

				 				Fancy is dead and drunken at its goal;

				 				Yet can I stamp my foot upon thy floor,

				 				Yet can I ope thy window-sash to find

				 				The meadow thou hast tramped o’er and o’er,⁠—

				 				Yet can I think of thee till thought is blind,⁠—

				 				Yet can I gulp a bumper to thy name,⁠—

				 				O smile among the shades, for this is fame!





Lines Written in the Highlands After a Visit to Burns’s Country


			 				There is a charm in footing slow across a silent plain,

				 				Where patriot battle has been fought, where glory had the gain;

				 				There is a pleasure on the heath where Druids old have been,

				 				Where mantles gray have rustled by and swept the nettles green;

				 				There is Joy in every spot made known by times of old,

				 				New to the feet, although each tale a hundred times be told;

				 				There is a deeper Joy than all, more solemn in the heart,

				 				More parching to the tongue than all, of more divine a smart,

				 				When weary steps forget themselves upon a pleasant turf,

				 				Upon hot sand, or flinty road, or sea-shore iron scurf,

				 				Toward the Castle or the Cot, where long ago was born

				 				One who was great through mortal days, and died of fame unshorn.

				 				Light heather-bells may tremble then, but they are far away;

				 				Wood-lark may sing from sandy fern,⁠—the Sun may hear his Lay;

				 				Runnels may kiss the grass on shelves and shallows clear,

				 				But their low voices are not heard, though come on travels drear;

				 				Blood-red the sun may set behind black mountain peaks;

				 				Blue tides may sluice and drench their time in Caves and weedy creeks;

				 				Eagles may seem to sleep wing-wide upon the Air;

				 				Ring-doves may fly convuls’d across to some high-cedar’d lair;

				 				But the forgotten eye is still fast lidded to the ground,

				 				As Palmer’s, that with weariness, mid-desert shrine hath found.



			 				At such a time the soul’s a child, in childhood is the brain;

				 				Forgotten is the worldly heart⁠—alone, it heats in vain.⁠—

				 				Aye, if a Madman could have leave to pass a healthful day

				 				To tell his forehead’s swoon and faint when first began decay,

				 				He might make tremble many a one whose spirit had gone forth

				 				To find a Bard’s low cradle-place about the silent North.

				 				Scanty the hour and few the steps beyond the bourn of Care,

				 				Beyond the sweet and bitter world,⁠—beyond it unaware!

				 				Scanty the hour and few the steps, because a longer stay

				 				Would bar return, and make a man forget his mortal way:

				 				O horrible! to lose the sight of well remember’d face,

				 				Of Brother’s eyes, of Sister’s brow⁠—constant to every place;

				 				Filling the Air, as on we move, with Portraiture intense;

				 				More warm than those heroic tints that pain a Painter’s sense,

				 				When shapes of old come striding by, and visages of old,

				 				Locks shining black, hair scanty gray, and passions manifold.

				 				No, no, that horror cannot be, for at the cable’s length

				 				Man feels the gentle anchor pull and gladdens in its strength:⁠—

				 				One hour, half-idiot, he stands by mossy water-fall,

				 				But in the very next he reads his soul’s Memorial:⁠—

				 				He reads it on the mountain’s height, where chance he may sit down

				 				Upon rough marble diadem⁠—that hill’s eternal Crown.

				 				Yet be his Anchor e’er so fast, room is there for a prayer

				 				That man may never lose his Mind on Mountains black and bare;

				 				That he may stray league after league some great birthplace to find

				 				And keep his vision clear from speck, his inward sight unblind.





At Fingal’s Cave


			 				Not Aladdin magian

				 				Ever such a work began;

				 				Not the wizard of the Dee

				 				Ever such a dream could see;

				 				Not St. John, in Patmos’ isle,

				 				In the passion of his toil,

				 				When he saw the churches seven,

				 				Golden aisled, built up in heaven,

				 				Gazed at such a rugged wonder,

				 				As I stood its roofing under.

				 				Lo! I saw one sleeping there,

				 				On the marble cold and bare;

				 				While the surges wash’d his feet,

				 				And his garments white did beat

				 				Drench’d about the sombre rocks;

				 				On his neck his well-grown locks,

				 				Lifted dry above the main,

				 				Were upon the curl again.

				 				“What is this? and what art thou?”

				 				Whisper’d I, and touch’d his brow;

				 				“What art thou? and what is this?”

				 				Whisper’d I, and strove to kiss

				 				The spirit’s hand, to wake his eyes;

				 				Up he started in a trice:

				 				“I am Lycidas,” said he,

				 				“Famed in funeral minstrelsy!

				 				This was architectured thus

				 				By the great Oceanus!⁠—

				 				Here his mighty waters play

				 				Hollow organs all the day;

				 				Here, by turns, his dolphins all,

				 				Finny palmers, great and small,

				 				Come to pay devotion due,⁠—

				 				Each a mouth of pearls must strew!

				 				Many a mortal of these days

				 				Dares to pass our sacred ways;

				 				Dares to touch, audaciously,

				 				This cathedral of the sea!

				 				I have been the pontiff-priest,

				 				Where the waters never rest,

				 				Where a fledgy sea-bird choir

				 				Soars for ever! Holy fire

				 				I have hid from mortal man;

				 				Proteus is my Sacristan!

				 				But the dulled eye of mortal

				 				Hath pass’d beyond the rocky portal;

				 				So for ever will I leave

				 				Such a taint, and soon unweave

				 				All the magic of the place.”

				 				So saying, with a Spirit’s glance

				 				He dived!





Written Upon the Top of Ben Nevis


			 				Read me a lesson, Muse, and speak it loud

				 				Upon the top of Nevis, blind in mist!

				 				I look into the chasms, and a shroud

				 				Vaporous doth hide them,⁠—just so much wist

				 				Mankind do know of hell; I look o’erhead,

				 				And there is sullen mist,⁠—even so much

				 				Mankind can tell of heaven; mist is spread

				 				Before the earth, beneath me,⁠—even such,

				 				Even so vague is man’s sight of himself!

				 				Here are the craggy stones beneath my feet,⁠—

				 				Thus much I know that, a poor witless elf,

				 				I tread on them,⁠—that all my eye doth meet

				 				Is mist and crag, not only on this height,

				 				But in the world of thought and mental might!





The Gadfly


			 				All gentle folks who owe a grudge

				 				To any living thing

				 				Open your ears and stay your trudge

				 				Whilst I in dudgeon sing.



			 				The Gadfly he hath stung me sore⁠—

				 				O may he ne’er sting you!

				 				But we have many a horrid bore,⁠—

				 				He may sting black and blue.



			 				Has any here an old gray Mare

				 				With three legs all her store,

				 				O put it to her Buttocks bare

				 				And straight she’ll run on four.



			 				Has any here a Lawyer suit

				 				Of 1743,

				 				Take Lawyer’s nose and put it to ’t

				 				And you the end will see.



			 				Is there a Man in Parliament

				 				Dumbfounder’d in his speech,

				 				O let his neighbour make a rent

				 				And put one in his breech.



			 				O Lowther how much better thou

				 				Hadst figur’d t’ other day

				 				When to the folks thou mad’st a bow

				 				And hadst no more to say.



			 				If lucky Gadfly had but ta’en

				 				His seat …

				 				And put thee to a little pain

				 				To save thee from a worse.



			 				Better than Southey it had been,

				 				Better than Mr. D⁠⸺⁠

				 				Better than Wordsworth, too, I ween,

				 				Better than Mr. V⁠⸺.



			 				Forgive me, pray, good people all,

				 				For deviating so⁠—

				 				In spirit sure I had a call⁠—

				 				And now I on will go.



			 				Has any here a daughter fair

				 				Too fond of reading novels,

				 				Too apt to fall in love with care

				 				And charming Mister Lovels,



			 				O put a Gadfly to that thing

				 				She keeps so white and pert⁠—

				 				I mean the finger for the ring,

				 				And it will breed a wort.



			 				Has any here a pious spouse

				 				Who seven times a day

				 				Scolds as King David pray’d, to chouse

				 				And have her holy way⁠—



			 				O let a Gadfly’s little sting

				 				Persuade her sacred tongue

				 				That noises are a common thing,

				 				But that her bell has rung.



			 				And as this is the summum bo-

				 				num of all conquering,

				 				I leave “withouten wordes mo”

				 				The Gadfly’s little sting.





To Thomas Keats


				Belantree (for Ballantree) July 10 1818.



				Ah! ken ye what I met the day

				 				Out oure the Mountains

				 				A coming down by craggies gray

				 				An mossie fountains⁠—

				 				Ah goud-hair’d Marie yeve I pray

				 				Ane minute’s guessing⁠—

				 				For that I met upon the way

				 				Is past expressing.

				 				As I stood where a rocky brig

				 				A torrent crosses

				 				I spied upon a misty rig

				 				A troup o’ Horses⁠—

				 				And as they trotted down the glen

				 				I sped to meet them

				 				To see if I might know the Men

				 				To stop and greet them.

				 				First Willie on his sleek mare came

				 				At canting gallop,

				 				His long hair rustled like a flame

				 				On board a shallop,

				 				Then came his brother Rab and then

				 				Young Peggy’s Mither

				 				And Peggy too⁠—adown the glen

				 				They went togither⁠—

				 				I saw her wrappit in her hood

				 				Frae wind and raining⁠—

				 				Her cheek was flush wi’ timid blood

				 				Twixt growth and waning⁠—

				 				She turn’d her dazed eyes full oft

				 				For there her Brithers

				 				Came riding with her Bridegroom soft

				 				And mony ithers.

				 				Young Tarn came up and eyed me quick

				 				With reddened cheek⁠—

				 				Braw Tom was daffed like a chick⁠—

				 				He couldna speak⁠—

				 				Ah, Marie, they are all gane hame

				 				Through blustering weather

				 				An’ every heart is full on flame

				 				An’ light as feather.

				 				Ah! Marie, they are all gone hame

				 				Frae happy wadding,

				 				Whilst I⁠—Ah is it not a shame?

				 				Sad tears am shedding.





On Hearing the Bag-Pipe and Seeing “The Stranger” Played at Inverary


			 				Of late two dainties were before me plac’d

				 				Sweet, holy, pure, sacred and innocent,

				 				From the ninth sphere to me benignly sent

				 				That Gods might know my own particular taste:

				 				First the soft Bag-pipe mourn’d with zealous haste,

				 				The Stranger next with head on bosom bent

				 				Sigh’d; rueful again the piteous Bag-pipe went,

				 				Again the Stranger sighings fresh did waste.

				 				O Bag-pipe, thou didst steal my heart away⁠—

				 				O Stranger, thou my nerves from Pipe didst charm⁠—

				 				O Bag-pipe thou didst re-assert thy sway⁠—

				 				Again thou. Stranger, gav’st me fresh alarm⁠—

				 				Alas! I could not choose. Ah! my poor heart

				 				Mum chance art thou with both oblig’d to part.





Mrs. Cameron and Ben Nevis


				After all there was one Mrs. Cameron of 50 years of age and the fattest woman in all Inverness-shire who got up this Mountain some few years ago⁠—true she had her servants⁠—but then she had herself. She ought to have hired Sisyphus⁠—“Up the high hill he heaves a huge round⁠—Mrs. Cameron.” ’Tis said a little conversation took place between the mountain and the Lady. After taking a glass of Whisky as she was tolerably seated at ease she thus began⁠—

			 			 				 					Mrs. C.

				 					Upon my life Sir Nevis I am piqued

					 					That I have so far panted tugg’d and reek’d

					 					To do an honor to your old bald pate

					 					And now am sitting on you just to bait,

					 					Without your paying me one compliment.

					 					Alas, ’tis so with all, when our intent

					 					Is plain, and in the eye of all Mankind

					 					We fair ones show a preference, too blind!

					 					You Gentle man immediately turn tail⁠—

					 					O let me then my hapless fate bewail!

					 					Ungrateful Baldpate have I not disdain’d

					 					The pleasant Valleys⁠—have I not madbrain’d

					 					Deserted all my Pickles and preserves

					 					My China closet too⁠—with wretched Nerves

					 					To boot⁠—say, wretched ingrate, have I not

					 					Left my soft cushion chair and caudle pot?

					 					’Tis true I had no corns⁠—no! thank the fates

					 					My Shoemaker was always Mr. Bates.

					 					And if not Mr. Bates why I’m not old!

					 					Still dumb ungrateful Nevis⁠—still so cold!





Here the Lady took some more whisky and was putting even more to her lips when she dashed it to the Ground, for the Mountain began to grumble⁠—which continued for a few minutes before he thus began⁠—

			 				 					Ben Nevis

				 					What whining bit of tongue and Mouth thus dares

					 					Disturb my slumber of a thousand years?

					 					Even so long my sleep has been secure⁠—

					 					And to be so awak’d I’ll not endure.

					 					Oh pain⁠—for since the Eagle’s earliest scream

					 					I’ve had a damn’d confounded ugly dream,

					 					A Nightmare sure. What! Madam, was it you?

					 					It cannot be! My old eyes are not true!

					 					Red-Crag, my Spectacles! Now let me see!

					 					Good Heavens! Lady, how the gemini

					 					Did you get here? O, I shall split my sides!

					 					I shall earthquake⁠—





			 				 					Mrs. C.

				 					Sweet Nevis do not quake, for though I love

					 					Your honest Countenance all things above,

					 					Truly I should not like to be convey’d

					 					So far into your Bosom⁠—gentle Maid

					 					Loves not too rough a treatment, gentle Sir⁠—

					 					Pray thee be calm and do not quake nor stir

					 					No, not a Stone, or I shall go in fits⁠—





			 				 					Ben Nevis

				 					I must⁠—I shall⁠—I meet not such tit bits⁠—

					 					I meet not such sweet creatures every day⁠—

					 					By my old nightcap night and day

					 					I must have one sweet Buss⁠—I must and shall!

					 					Red Crag!⁠—What! Madam, can you then repent

					 					Of all the toil and vigour you have spent

					 					To see Ben Nevis and to touch his nose?

					 					Red Crag I say! O I must have them close!

					 					Red Crag, there lies beneath my farthest toe

					 					A vein of Sulphur⁠—go, dear Red Crag, go⁠—

					 					And rub your flinty back against it⁠—budge!

					 					Dear Madam, I must kiss you, faith I must!

					 					I must embrace you with my dearest gust!

					 					Block-head, d’ ye hear!⁠—Block-head, I’ll make her feel.

					 					There lies beneath my east leg’s northern heel

					 					A cave of young earth dragons;⁠—well my boy

					 					Go thither quick and so complete my joy.

					 					Take you a bundle of the largest pines,

					 					And when the sun on fiercest Phosphor shines,

					 					Fire them and ram them in the Dragon’s nest,

					 					Then will the dragons fry and fizz their best

					 					Until ten thousand now no bigger than

					 					Poor alligators⁠—poor things of one span⁠—

					 					Will each one swell to twice ten times the size

					 					Of northern whale⁠—then for the tender prize⁠—

					 					The moment then⁠—for then will Red Crag rub

					 					His flinty back⁠—and I shall kiss and snub

					 					And press my dainty morsel to my breast.

					 					Block-head make haste!



				 					O Muses, weep the rest⁠—

					 					The Lady fainted and he thought her dead;

					 					So pulled the clouds again about his head

					 					And went to sleep again; soon she was rous’d

					 					By her affrighted servants⁠—next day, hous’d

					 					Safe on the lowly ground she bless’d her fate

					 					That fainting fit was not delayed too late.





But what surprised me above all is how the lady got down again. I felt it horribly. ’Twas the most vile descent⁠—shook me all to pieces.





Translation from a Sonnet of Ronsard


			 				Nature withheld Cassandra in the skies,

				 				For more adornment, a full thousand years;

				 				She took their cream of Beauty’s fairest dyes,

				 				And shaped and tinted her above all Peers:

				 				Meanwhile Love kept her dearly with his wings,

				 				And underneath their shadow fill’d her eyes

				 				With such a richness that the cloudy Kings

				 				Of high Olympus utter’d slavish sighs.

				 				When from the Heavens I saw her first descend,

				 				My heart took fire, and only burning pains,

				 				They were my pleasures⁠—they my Life’s sad end;

				 				Love pour’d her beauty into my warm veins.





				A Prophecy 				To George Keats in America




			 				’Tis the witching time of night,

				 				Orbed is the moon and bright,

				 				And the Stars they glisten, glisten,

				 				Seeming with bright eyes to listen.

				 				For what listen they?

				 				For a song and for a charm,

				 				See they glisten in alarm,

				 				And the Moon is waxing warm

				 				To hear what I shall say.

				 				Moon! keep wide thy golden ears⁠—

				 				Hearken, Stars! and hearken, Spheres!⁠—

				 				Hearken, thou eternal Sky!

				 				I sing an infant’s Lullaby,

				 				O pretty lullaby!

				 				Listen, listen, listen, listen,

				 				Glisten, glisten, glisten, glisten,

				 				And hear my Lullaby!

				 				Though the Rushes, that will make

				 				Its cradle, still are in the lake⁠—

				 				Though the linen that will be

				 				Its swathe, is on the cotton tree⁠—

				 				Though the woollen that will keep

				 				It warm, is on the silly sheep⁠—

				 				Listen, Starlight, listen, listen,

				 				Glisten, glisten, glisten, glisten,

				 				And hear my lullaby!

				 				Child, I see thee! Child, I’ve found thee

				 				Midst of the quiet all around thee!

				 				Child, I see thee! Child, I spy thee!

				 				And thy mother sweet is nigh thee!

				 				Child, I know thee! Child no more,

				 				But a Poet evermore!

				 				See, see, the Lyre, the Lyre,

				 				In a flame of fire,

				 				Upon the little cradle’s top

				 				Flaring, flaring, flaring,

				 				Past the eyesight’s bearing.

				 				Awake it from its sleep,

				 				And see if it can keep

				 				Its eyes upon the blaze⁠—

				 				Amaze, amaze!

				 				It stares, it stares, it stares,

				 				It dares what no one dares!

				 				It lifts its little hand into the flame

				 				Unharm’d, and on the strings

				 				Paddles a little tune, and sings,

				 				With dumb endeavour sweetly⁠—

				 				Bard art thou completely!

				 				Little child

				 				O’ th’ western wild,

				 				Bard art thou completely!

				 				Sweetly with dumb endeavour.

				 				A poet now or never,

				 				Little child

				 				O’ th’ western wild,

				 				A Poet now or never!





Song


			 				I had a dove and the sweet dove died;

				 				And I have thought it died of grieving:

				 				O, what could it grieve for? Its feet were tied,

				 				With a silken thread of my own hand’s weaving;

				 				Sweet little red feet! why should you die⁠—

				 				Why should you leave me, sweet bird! why?

				 				You lived alone in the forest-tree,

				 				Why, pretty thing! would you not live with me?

				 				I kiss’d you oft and gave you white peas;

				 				Why not live sweetly, as in the green trees?





Fancy


			 				Ever let the Fancy roam,

				 				Pleasure never is at home:

				 				At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth,

				 				Like to bubbles when rain pelteth;

				 				Then let winged Fancy wander

				 				Through the thought still spread beyond her:

				 				Open wide the mind’s cage-door,

				 				She’ll dart forth, and cloudward soar.

				 				O sweet Fancy! let her loose;

				 				Summer’s joys are spoilt by use,

				 				And the enjoying of the Spring

				 				Fades as does its blossoming;

				 				Autumn’s red-lipp’d fruitage too,

				 				Blushing through the mist and dew,

				 				Cloys with tasting: What do then?

				 				Sit thee by the ingle, when

				 				The sear faggot blazes bright,

				 				Spirit of a winter’s night;

				 				When the soundless earth is muffled,

				 				And the caked snow is shuffled

				 				From the ploughboy’s heavy shoon;

				 				When the Night doth meet the Noon

				 				In a dark conspiracy

				 				To banish Even from her sky.

				 				Sit thee there, and send abroad,

				 				With a mind self-overawed,

				 				Fancy, high-commission’d:⁠—send her!

				 				She has vassals to attend her:

				 				She will bring, in spite of frost,

				 				Beauties that the earth hath lost;

				 				She will bring thee, all together,

				 				All delights of summer weather;

				 				All the buds and bells of May,

				 				From dewy sward or thorny spray;

				 				All the heaped Autumn’s wealth,

				 				With a still, mysterious stealth:

				 				She will mix these pleasures up

				 				Like three fit wines in a cup,

				 				And thou shalt quaff it:⁠—thou shalt hear

				 				Distant harvest-carols clear;

				 				Rustle of the reaped corn;

				 				Sweet birds antheming the morn:

				 				And, in the same moment⁠—hark!

				 				’Tis the early April lark,

				 				Or the rooks, with busy caw,

				 				Foraging for sticks and straw.

				 				Thou shalt, at one glance, behold

				 				The daisy and the marigold;

				 				White-plumed lilies, and the first

				 				Hedge-grown primrose that hath burst;

				 				Shaded hyacinth, alway

				 				Sapphire queen of the mid-May;

				 				And every leaf, and every flower

				 				Pearled with the self-same shower.

				 				Thou shalt see the field-mouse peep

				 				Meagre from its celled sleep;

				 				And the snake all winter-thin

				 				Cast on sunny bank its skin;

				 				Freckled nest-eggs thou shalt see

				 				Hatching in the hawthorn-tree,

				 				When the hen-bird’s wing doth rest

				 				Quiet on her mossy nest;

				 				Then the hurry and alarm

				 				When the bee-hive casts its swarm;

				 				Acorns ripe down-pattering

				 				While the autumn breezes sing.



			 				Oh, sweet Fancy! let her loose;

				 				Everything is spoilt by use;

				 				Where’s the cheek that doth not fade,

				 				Too much gazed at? Where’s the maid

				 				Whose lip mature is ever new?

				 				Wheres the eye, however blue,

				 				Does not weary? Where’s the face

				 				One would meet in every place?

				 				Where’s the voice, however soft,

				 				One would hear so very oft?

				 				At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth

				 				Like to bubbles when rain pelteth.

				 				Let, then, winged Fancy find

				 				Thee a mistress to thy mind:

				 				Dulcet-eyed as Ceres’ daughter

				 				Ere the God of Torment taught her

				 				How to frown and how to chide;

				 				With a waist and with a side

				 				White as Hebe’s, when her zone

				 				Slipt its golden clasp, and down

				 				Fell her kirtle to her feet,

				 				While she held the goblet sweet,

				 				And Jove grew languid.⁠—Break the mesh

				 				Of the Fancy’s silken leash;

				 				Quickly break her prison-string.

				 				And such joys as these she’ll bring.⁠—

				 				Let the winged Fancy roam,

				 				Pleasure never is at home.





Ode


			 				Bards of Passion and of Mirth,

				 				Ye have left your souls on earth!

				 				Have ye souls in heaven too,

				 				Double-lived in regions new?

				 				Yes, and those of heaven commune

				 				With the spheres of sun and moon;

				 				With the noise of fountains wond’rous

				 				And the parle of voices thund’rous;

				 				With the whisper of heaven’s trees

				 				And one another, in soft ease

				 				Seated on Elysian lawns

				 				Browsed by none but Dian’s fawns;

				 				Underneath large blue-bells tented,

				 				Where the daisies are rose-scented,

				 				And the rose herself has got

				 				Perfume which on earth is not;

				 				Where the nightingale doth sing

				 				Not a senseless, tranced thing,

				 				But divine melodious truth;

				 				Philosophic numbers smooth;

				 				Tales and golden histories

				 				Of heaven and its mysteries.



			 				Thus ye live on high, and then,

				 				On the earth ye live again;

				 				And the souls ye left behind you

				 				Teach us, here, the way to find you,

				 				Where your other souls are joying,

				 				Never slumber’d, never cloying.

				 				Here, your earth-born souls still speak

				 				To mortals, of their little week;

				 				Of their sorrows and delights;

				 				Of their passions and their spites;

				 				Of their glory and their shame;

				 				What doth strengthen and what maim.

				 				Thus ye teach us, every day,

				 				Wisdom, though fled far away.



			 				Bards of Passion and of Mirth,

				 				Ye have left your souls on earth!

				 				Ye have souls in heaven too,

				 				Double-lived in regions new!





Modern Love


			 				And what is love? It is a doll dress’d up

				 				For idleness to cosset, nurse, and dandle;

				 				A thing of soft misnomers, so divine

				 				That silly youth doth think to make itself

				 				Divine by loving, and so goes on

				 				Yawning and doting a whole summer long,

				 				Till Miss’s comb is made a pearl tiara,

				 				And common Wellingtons turn Romeo boots;

				 				Then Cleopatra lives at number seven,

				 				And Antony resides in Brunswick Square.

				 				Fools! if some passions high have warm’d the world,

				 				If Queens and Soldiers have play’d deep for hearts,

				 				It is no reason why such agonies

				 				Should be more common than the growth of weeds.

				 				Fools! make me whole again that weighty pearl

				 				The Queen of Egypt melted, and I’ll say

				 				That ye may love in spite of beaver hats.





Fragment of “The Castle Builder”


			 				To-night I’ll have my friar⁠—let me think

				 				About my room⁠—I’ll have it in the pink;

				 				It should be rich and sombre, and the moon,

				 				Just in its mid-life in the midst of June

				 				Should look thro’ four large windows and display

				 				Clear, but for gold-fish vases in the way,

				 				Their glassy diamonding on Turkish floor;

				 				The tapers keep aside, an hour and more,

				 				To see what else the moon alone can show;

				 				While the night-breeze doth softly let us know

				 				My terrace is well bower’d with oranges.

				 				Upon the floor the dullest spirit sees

				 				A guitar-ribband and a lady’s glove

				 				Beside a crumple-leaved tale of love;

				 				A tambour-frame, with Venus sleeping there,

				 				All finish’d but some ringlets of her hair;

				 				A viol, bow-strings torn, cross-wise upon

				 				A glorious folio of Anacreon;

				 				A skull upon a mat of roses lying,

				 				Ink’d purple with a song concerning dying;

				 				An hour-glass on the turn, amid the trails

				 				Of passion-flower;⁠—just in time there sails

				 				A cloud across the moon,⁠—the lights bring in!

				 				And see what more my phantasy can win.

				 				It is a gorgeous room, but somewhat sad;

				 				The draperies are so, as tho’ they had

				 				Been made for Cleopatra’s winding-sheet;

				 				And opposite the stedfast eye doth meet

				 				A spacious looking-glass, upon whose face,

				 				In letters raven-sombre, you may trace

				 				Old “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin.”

				 				Greek busts and statuary have ever been

				 				Held, by the finest spirits, fitter far,

				 				Than vase grotesque and Siamesian jar;

				 				Therefore ’tis sure a want of Attic taste

				 				That I should rather love a Gothic waste

				 				Of eyesight on cinque-coloured potter’s clay,

				 				Than on the marble fairness of old Greece.

				 				My table-coverlits of Jason’s fleece

				 				And black Numidian sheep-wool should be wrought,

				 				Gold, black, and heavy, from the Lama brought.

				 				My ebon sofas should delicious be

				 				With down from Leda’s cygnet progeny.

				 				My pictures all Salvator’s, save a few

				 				Of Titian’s portraiture, and one, though new,

				 				Of Haydon’s in its fresh magnificence.

				 				My wine⁠—O good! ’tis here at my desire,

				 				And I must sit to supper with my friar.





Song


				Written on a blank page in Beaumont and Fletcher’s works, between “Cupid’s Revenge” and “The Two Noble Kinsmen”



				Spirit here that reignest!

				 				Spirit here that painest!

				 				Spirit here that burnest!

				 				Spirit here that mournest!

				 				Spirit, I bow

				 				My forehead low,

				 				Enshaded with thy pinions.

				 				Spirit, I look

				 				All passion-struck

				 				Into thy pale dominions.



			 				Spirit here that laughest!

				 				Spirit here that quaffest!

				 				Spirit here that dancest!

				 				Noble soul that prancest!

				 				Spirit, with thee

				 				I join in the glee

				 				A-nudging the elbow of Momus.

				 				Spirit, I flush

				 				With a Bacchanal blush

				 				Just fresh from the Banquet of Comus.





Spenserian Stanza


				Written at the close of Canto II

Book V

of The Faerie Queene



				In after-time, a sage of mickle lore

				 				Yclep’d Typographus, the Giant took,

				 				And did refit his limbs as heretofore,

				 				And made him read in many a learned book,

				 				And into many a lively legend look;

				 				Thereby in goodly themes so training him,

				 				That all his brutishness he quite forsook,

				 				When, meeting Artegall and Talus grim,

				 				The one he struck stone-blind, the other’s eyes wox dim.





				Hyperion 				A Fragment





Book I


				 					Deep in the shady sadness of a vale

					 					Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn,

					 					Far from the fiery noon, and eve’s one star,

					 					Sat gray-hair’d Saturn, quiet as a stone,

					 					Still as the silence round about his lair;

					 					Forest on forest hung about his head

					 					Like cloud on cloud. No stir of air was there,

					 					Not so much life as on a summer’s day

					 					Robs not one light seed from the feather’d grass,

					 					But where the dead leaf fell, there did it rest.

					 					A stream went voiceless by, still deadened more

					 					By reason of his fallen divinity

					 					Spreading a shade: the Naiad ’mid her reeds

					 					Press’d her cold finger closer to her lips.



				 					Along the margin-sand large foot-marks went,

					 					No further than to where his feet had stray’d,

					 					And slept there since. Upon the sodden ground

					 					His old right hand lay nerveless, listless, dead,

					 					Unsceptred; and his realmless eyes were closed;

					 					While his bow’d head seem’d list’ning to the Earth,

					 					His ancient mother, for some comfort yet.



				 					It seem’d no force could wake him from his place;

					 					But there came one, who with a kindred hand

					 					Touch’d his wide shoulders, after bending low

					 					With reverence, though to one who knew it not.

					 					She was a Goddess of the infant world;

					 					By her in stature the tall Amazon

					 					Had stood a pigmy’s height: she would have ta’en

					 					Achilles by the hair and bent his neck;

					 					Or with a finger stay’d Ixion’s wheel.

					 					Her face was large as that of Memphian sphinx,

					 					Pedestal’d haply in a palace-court,

					 					When sages look’d to Egypt for their lore.

					 					But oh! how unlike marble was that face;

					 					How beautiful, if sorrow had not made

					 					Sorrow more beautiful than Beauty’s self.

					 					There was a listening fear in her regard,

					 					As if calamity had but begun;

					 					As if the vanward clouds of evil days

					 					Had spent their malice, and the sullen rear

					 					Was with its stored thunder labouring up.

					 					One hand she press’d upon that aching spot

					 					Where beats the human heart, as if just there,

					 					Though an immortal, she felt cruel pain:

					 					The other upon Saturn’s bended neck

					 					She laid, and to the level of his ear

					 					Leaning with parted lips, some words she spake

					 					In solemn tenour and deep organ tone:

					 					Some mourning words, which in our feeble tongue

					 					Would come in these like accents; O how frail

					 					To that large utterance of the early gods!

					 					“Saturn, look up!⁠—though wherefore, poor old King?

					 					I have no comfort for thee, no not one:

					 					I cannot say, ‘O wherefore sleepest thou?’

					 					For heaven is parted from thee, and the earth

					 					Knows thee not, thus afflicted, for a God;

					 					And ocean too, with all its solemn noise,

					 					Has from thy sceptre pass’d; and all the air

					 					Is emptied of thine hoary majesty.

					 					Thy thunder, conscious of the new command,

					 					Rumbles reluctant o’er our fallen house;

					 					And thy sharp lightning in unpractised hands

					 					Scorches and burns our once serene domain.

					 					O aching time! O moments big as years!

					 					All as ye pass swell out the monstrous truth,

					 					And press it so upon our weary griefs

					 					That unbelief has not a space to breathe.

					 					Saturn, sleep on:⁠—O thoughtless, why did I

					 					Thus violate thy slumbrous solitude?

					 					Why should I ope thy melancholy eyes?

					 					Saturn, sleep on! while at thy feet I weep.”



				 					As when, upon a tranced summer-night,

					 					Those green-robed senators of mighty woods,

					 					Tall oaks, branch-charmed by the earnest stars,

					 					Dream, and so dream all night without a stir,

					 					Save from one gradual solitary gust

					 					Which comes upon the silence, and dies off,

					 					As if the ebbing air had but one wave:

					 					So came these words and went; the while in tears

					 					She touch’d her fair large forehead to the ground,

					 					Just where her falling hair might be outspread

					 					A soft and silken mat for Saturn’s feet.

					 					One moon, with alteration slow, had shed

					 					Her silver seasons four upon the night,

					 					And still these two were postured motionless,

					 					Like natural sculpture in cathedral cavern;

					 					The frozen God still couchant on the earth,

					 					And the sad Goddess weeping at his feet:

					 					Until at length old Saturn lifted up

					 					His faded eyes, and saw his kingdom gone,

					 					And all the gloom and sorrow of the place,

					 					And that fair kneeling Goddess; and then spake,

					 					As with a palsied tongue, and while his beard

					 					Shook horrid with such aspen-malady:

					 					“O tender spouse of gold Hyperion,

					 					Thea, I feel thee ere I see thy face;

					 					Look up, and let me see our doom in it;

					 					Look up, and tell me if this feeble shape

					 					Is Saturn’s; tell me, if thou hear’st the voice

					 					Of Saturn; tell me, if this wrinkling brow,

					 					Naked and bare of its great diadem,

					 					Peers like the front of Saturn. Who had power

					 					To make me desolate? whence came the strength?

					 					How was it nurtured to such bursting forth,

					 					While Fate seem’d strangled in my nervous grasp?

					 					But it is so; and I am smother’d up,

					 					And buried from all godlike exercise

					 					Of influence benign on planets pale,

					 					Of admonitions to the winds and seas,

					 					Of peaceful sway above man’s harvesting,

					 					And all those acts which Deity supreme

					 					Doth ease its heart of love in.⁠—I am gone

					 					Away from my own bosom: I have left

					 					My strong identity, my real self,

					 					Somewhere between the throne, and where I sit

					 					Here on this spot of earth. Search, Thea, search!

					 					Open thine eyes eterne, and sphere them round

					 					Upon all space: space starr’d, and lorn of light;

					 					Space region’d with life-air, and barren void;

					 					Spaces of fire, and all the yawn of hell.

					 					Search, Thea, search! and tell me if thou seest

					 					A certain shape or shadow, making way

					 					With wings or chariot fierce to repossess

					 					A heaven he lost erewhile: it must⁠—it must

					 					Be of ripe progress⁠—Saturn must be King.

					 					Yes, there must be a golden victory;

					 					There must be Gods thrown down, and trumpets blown

					 					Of triumph calm, and hymns of festival

					 					Upon the gold clouds metropolitan,

					 					Voices of soft proclaim, and silver stir

					 					Of strings in hollow shells; and there shall be

					 					Beautiful things made new, for the surprise

					 					Of the sky-children; I will give command:

					 					Thea! Thea! Thea! where is Saturn!



				 					This passion lifted him upon his feet,

					 					And made his hands to struggle in the air,

					 					His Druid locks to shake and ooze with sweat,

					 					His eyes to fever out, his voice to cease.

					 					He stood, and heard not Thea’s sobbing deep;

					 					A little time, and then again he snatch’d

					 					Utterance thus:⁠—“But cannot I create?

					 					Cannot I form? Cannot I fashion forth

					 					Another world, another universe,

					 					To overbear and crumble this to nought?

					 					Where is another chaos? Where?”⁠—That word

					 					Found way unto Olympus, and made quake

					 					The rebel three.⁠—Thea was startled up,

					 					And in her bearing was a sort of hope,

					 					As thus she quick-voiced spake, yet full of awe.



				 					“This cheers our fallen house: come to our friends,

					 					O Saturn! come away, and give them heart;

					 					I know the covert, for thence came I hither.”

					 					Thus brief; then with beseeching eyes she went

					 					With backward footing through the shade a space:

					 					He follow’d, and she turn’d to lead the way

					 					Through aged boughs, that yielded like the mist

					 					Which eagles cleave upmounting from their nest.



				 					Meanwhile in other realms big tears were shed,

					 					More sorrow like to this, and such like woe,

					 					Too huge for mortal tongue or pen of scribe:

					 					The Titans fierce, self-hid, or prison-bound

					 					Groan’d for the old allegiance once more,

					 					And listen’d in sharp pain for Saturn’s voice.

					 					But one of the whole mammoth-brood still kept

					 					His sov’reignty, and rule, and majesty;

					 					Blazing Hyperion on his orbed fire

					 					Still sat, still snuff’d the incense, teeming up

					 					From man to the sun’s God; yet unsecure:

					 					For as among us mortals omens drear

					 					Fright and perplex, so also shudder’d he,

					 					Not at dog’s howl, or gloom-bird’s hated screech,

					 					Or the familiar visiting of one

					 					Upon the first toll of his passing-bell,

					 					Or prophesyings of the midnight lamp:

					 					But horrors, portion’d to a giant nerve,

					 					Oft made Hyperion ache. His palace bright

					 					Bastion’d with pyramids of glowing gold,

					 					And touch’d with shade of bronzed obelisks,

					 					Glared a blood-red through all its thousand courts,

					 					Arches, and domes, and fiery galleries;

					 					And all its curtains of Aurorian clouds

					 					Flush’d angerly: while sometimes eagles’ wings,

					 					Unseen before by Gods or wondering men,

					 					Darken’d the place; and neighing steeds were heard,

					 					Not heard before by Gods or wondering men.

					 					Also, when he would taste the spicy wreaths,

					 					Of incense breathed aloft from sacred hills,

					 					Instead of sweets, his ample palate took

					 					Savour of poisonous brass and metal sick:

					 					And so, when harbour’d in the sleepy west,

					 					After the full completion of fair day,

					 					For rest divine upon exalted couch

					 					And slumber in the arms of melody,

					 					He paced away the pleasant hours of ease

					 					With stride colossal, on from hall to hall;

					 					While far within each aisle and deep recess,

					 					His winged minions in close clusters stood,

					 					Amazed and full of fear; like anxious men

					 					Who on wide plains gather in panting troops,

					 					When earthquakes jar their battlements and towers.

					 					Even now while Saturn, roused from icy trance,

					 					Went step for step with Thea through the woods,

					 					Hyperion, leaving twilight in the rear,

					 					Came slope upon the threshold of the west;

					 					Then, as was wont, his palace-door flew ope

					 					In smoothest silence, save what solemn tubes,

					 					Blown by the serious Zephyrs, gave of sweet

					 					And wandering sounds, slow-breathed melodies;

					 					And like a rose in vermeil tint and shape,

					 					In fragrance soft, and coolness to the eye,

					 					That inlet to severe magnificence

					 					Stood full blown, for the God to enter in.



				 					He enter’d, but he enter’d full of wrath,

					 					His flaming robes stream’d out beyond his heels,

					 					And gave a roar, as if of earthly fire,

					 					That scared away the meek ethereal Hours

					 					And made their dove-wings tremble. On he flared

					 					From stately nave to nave, from vault to vault,

					 					Through bowers of fragrant and enwreathed light,

					 					And diamond-paved lustrous long arcades

					 					Until he reach’d the great main cupola;

					 					There standing fierce beneath, he stampt his foot,

					 					And from the basements deep to the high towers

					 					Jarr’d his own golden region: and before

					 					The quavering thunder thereupon had ceased,

					 					His voice leapt out, despite of godlike curb,

					 					To this result: “O dreams of day and night!

					 					O monstrous forms! O effigies of pain!

					 					O spectres busy in a cold, cold gloom!

					 					O lank-ear’d Phantoms of black-weeded pools!

					 					Why do I know ye? why have I seen ye! why

					 					Is my eternal essence thus distraught

					 					To see and to behold these horrors new?

					 					Saturn is fallen, am I too to fall?

					 					Am I to leave this haven of my rest,

					 					This cradle of my glory, this soft clime,

					 					This calm luxuriance of blissful light,

					 					These crystalline pavilions, and pure fanes,

					 					Of all my lucent empire? It is left

					 					Deserted, void, nor any haunt of mine.

					 					The blaze, the splendour, and the symmetry,

					 					I cannot see⁠—but darkness, death and darkness.

					 					Even here, into my centre of repose,

					 					The shady visions come to domineer,

					 					Insult, and blind, and stifle up my pomp.⁠—

					 					Fall!⁠—No, by Tellus and her briny robes!

					 					Over the fiery frontier of my realms

					 					I will advance a terrible right arm

					 					Shall scare that infant thunderer, rebel Jove,

					 					And bid old Saturn take his throne again.”

					 					He spake, and ceased, the while a heavier threat

					 					Held struggle with his throat, but came not forth;

					 					For as in theatres of crowded men

					 					Hubbub increases more they call out, “Hush!”

					 					So at Hyperion’s words the Phantoms pale

					 					Bestirr’d themselves, thrice horrible and cold;

					 					And from the mirror’d level where he stood

					 					A mist arose, as from a scummy marsh.

					 					At this, through all his bulk an agony

					 					Crept gradual, from the feet unto the crown,

					 					Like a lithe serpent vast and muscular

					 					Making slow way, with head and neck convulsed

					 					From over-strained might. Released, he fled

					 					To the eastern gates, and full six dewy hours

					 					Before the dawn in season due should blush,

					 					He breathed fierce breath against the sleepy portals,

					 					Clear’d them of heavy vapours, burst them wide

					 					Suddenly on the ocean’s chilly streams.

					 					The planet orb of fire, whereon he rode

					 					Each day from east to west the heavens through,

					 					Spun round in sable curtaining of clouds;

					 					Not therefore veiled quite, blindfold, and hid,

					 					But ever and anon the glancing spheres,

					 					Circles, and arcs, and broad-belting colure,

					 					Glow’d through, and wrought upon the muffling dark

					 					Sweet-shaped lightnings from the nadir deep

					 					Up to the zenith,⁠—hieroglyphics old,

					 					Which sages and keen-eyed astrologers

					 					Then living on the earth, with labouring thought

					 					Won from the gaze of many centuries:

					 					Now lost, save what we find on remnants huge

					 					Of stone, or marble swart; their import gone,

					 					Their wisdom long since fled.⁠—Two wings this orb

					 					Possess’d for glory, two fair argent wings,

					 					Ever exalted at the God’s approach:

					 					And now, from forth the gloom their plumes immense

					 					Rose, one by one, till all outspreaded were;

					 					While still the dazzling globe maintain’d eclipse,

					 					Awaiting for Hyperion’s command.

					 					Fain would he have commanded, fain took throne

					 					And bid the day begin, if but for change.

					 					He might not:⁠—No, though a primeval God

					 					The sacred seasons might not be disturb’d.

					 					Therefore the operations of the dawn

					 					Stay’d in their birth, even as here ’tis told.

					 					Those silver wings expanded sisterly,

					 					Eager to sail their orb; the porches wide

					 					Open’d upon the dusk demesnes of night;

					 					And the bright Titan, phrenzied with new woes,

					 					Unused to bend, by hard compulsion bent

					 					His spirit to the sorrow of the time:

					 					And all along a dismal rack of clouds,

					 					Upon the boundaries of day and night,

					 					He stretch’d himself in grief and radiance faint.

					 					There as he lay, the Heaven with its stars

					 					Look’d down on him with pity, and the voice

					 					Of Cœlus, from the universal space,

					 					Thus whisper’d low and solemn in his ear:

					 					“O brightest of my children dear, earth-born

					 					And sky-engendered. Son of Mysteries

					 					All unrevealed even to the powers

					 					Which met at thy creating; at whose joys

					 					And palpitations sweet, and pleasures soft,

					 					I, Coelus, wonder, how they came and whence;

					 					And at the fruits thereof what shapes they be,

					 					Distinct, and visible; symbols divine,

					 					Manifestations of that beauteous life

					 					Diffused unseen throughout eternal space:

					 					Of these new-form’d art thou, oh brightest child!

					 					Of these, thy brethren and the Goddesses!

					 					There is sad feud among ye, and rebellion

					 					Of son against his sire. I saw him fall,

					 					I saw my first-born tumbled from his throne!

					 					To me his arms were spread, to me his voice

					 					Found way from forth the thunders round his head!

					 					Pale wox I, and in vapours hid my face.

					 					Art thou, too, near such doom? vague fear there is:

					 					For I have seen my sons most unlike Gods.

					 					Divine ye were created, and divine

					 					In sad demeanour, solemn, undisturb’d,

					 					Unruffled, like high Gods, ye lived and ruled:

					 					Now I behold in you fear, hope, and wrath;

					 					Actions of rage and passion; even as

					 					I see them, on the mortal world beneath,

					 					In men who die.⁠—This is the grief, O Son!

					 					Sad sign of ruin, sudden dismay, and fall!

					 					Yet do thou strive; as thou art capable,

					 					As thou canst move about, an evident God;

					 					And canst oppose to each malignant hour

					 					Ethereal presence:⁠—I am but a voice;

					 					My life is but the life of winds and tides,

					 					No more than winds and tides can I avail:⁠—

					 					But thou canst.⁠—Be thou therefore in the van

					 					Of circumstance; yea, seize the arrow’s barb

					 					Before the tense string murmur.⁠—To the earth!

					 					For there thou wilt find Saturn, and his woes.

					 					Meantime I will keep watch on thy bright sun,

					 					And of thy seasons be a careful nurse.”⁠—

					 					Ere half this region-whisper had come down,

					 					Hyperion arose, and on the stars

					 					Lifted his curved lids, and kept them wide

					 					Until it ceased; and still he kept them wide;

					 					And still they were the same bright, patient stars.

					 					Then with a slow incline of his broad breast,

					 					Like to a diver in the pearly seas,

					 					Forward he stoop’d over the airy shore,

					 					And plunged all noiseless into the deep night.





Book II


				 					Just at the self-same beat of Time’s wide wings

					 					Hyperion slid into the rustled air,

					 					And Saturn gain’d with Thea that sad place

					 					Where Cybele and the bruised Titans mourn’d.

					 					It was a den where no insulting light

					 					Could glimmer on their tears; where their own groans

					 					They felt, but heard not, for the solid roar

					 					Of thunderous waterfalls and torrents hoarse,

					 					Pouring a constant bulk, uncertain where.

					 					Crag jutting forth to crag, and rocks that seem’d

					 					Ever as if just rising from a sleep,

					 					Forehead to forehead held their monstrous horns;

					 					And thus in thousand hugest phantasies

					 					Made a fit roofing to this nest of woe.

					 					Instead of thrones, hard flint they sat upon,

					 					Couches of rugged stone, and slaty ridge

					 					Stubborn’d with iron. All were not assembled:

					 					Some chain’d in torture, and some wandering.

					 					Cœus, and Gyges, and Briarcüs,

					 					Typhon, and Dolor, and Porphyrion,

					 					With many more, the brawniest in assault,

					 					Were pent in regions of laborious breath;

					 					Dungeon’d in opaque element to keep

					 					Their clenched teeth still clench’d, and all their limbs

					 					Lock’d up like veins of metal, crampt and screw’d;

					 					Without a motion, save of their big hearts

					 					Heaving in pain, and horribly convulsed

					 					With sanguine, feverous, boiling gurge of pulse.

					 					Mnemosyne was straying in the world;

					 					Far from her moon had Phœbe wandered;

					 					And many else were free to roam abroad,

					 					But for the main, here found they covert drear.

					 					Scarce images of life, one here, one there,

					 					Lay vast and edgeways; like a dismal cirque

					 					Of Druid stones, upon a forlorn moor,

					 					When the chill rain begins at shut of eve,

					 					In dull November, and their chancel vault,

					 					The Heaven itself, is blinded throughout night.

					 					Each one kept shroud, nor to his neighbour gave

					 					Or word, or look, or action of despair.

					 					Creüs was one; his ponderous iron mace

					 					Lay by him, and a shatter’d rib of rock

					 					Told of his rage, ere he thus sank and pined.

					 					Iapetus another; in his grasp,

					 					A serpent’s plashy neck; its barbed tongue

					 					Squeezed from the gorge, and all its uncurl’d length

					 					Dead; and because the creature could not spit

					 					Its poison in the eyes of conquering Jove.

					 					Next Cottus: prone he lay, chin uppermost,

					 					As though in pain: for still upon the flint

					 					He ground severe his skull, with open mouth

					 					And eyes at horrid working. Nearest him

					 					Asia, born of most enormous Caf,

					 					Who cost her mother Tellus keener pangs,

					 					Though feminine, than any of her sons:

					 					More thought than woe was in her dusky face,

					 					For she was prophesying of her glory;

					 					And in her wide imagination stood

					 					Palm-shaded temples, and high rival fanes,

					 					By Oxus or in Ganges’ sacred isles.

					 					Even as Hope upon her anchor leans,

					 					So leant she, not so fair, upon a tusk

					 					Shed from the broadest of her elephants.

					 					Above her, on a crag’s uneasy shelve,

					 					Upon his elbow raised, all prostrate else,

					 					Shadow’d Enceladus; once tame and mild

					 					As grazing ox unworried in the meads;

					 					Now tiger-passion’d, lion-thoughted, wroth,

					 					He meditated, plotted, and even now

					 					Was hurling mountains in that second war,

					 					Not long delay’d, that scared the younger Gods

					 					To hide themselves in forms of beast and bird.

					 					Not far hence Atlas; and beside him prone

					 					Phorcus, the sire of Gorgons. Neighbour’d close

					 					Oceanus, and Tethys, in whose lap

					 					Sobb’d Clymene among her tangled hair.

					 					In midst of all lay Themis, at the feet

					 					Of Ops the queen all clouded round from sight;

					 					No shape distinguishable, more than when

					 					Thick night confounds the pine-tops with the clouds:

					 					And many else whose names may not be told.

					 					For when the Muse’s wings are air-ward spread,

					 					Who shall delay her flight? And she must chant

					 					Of Saturn, and his guide, who now had climb’d

					 					With damp and slippery footing from a depth

					 					More horrid still. Above a sombre cliff

					 					Their heads appear’d, and up their stature grew

					 					Till on the level height their steps found ease:

					 					Then Thea spread abroad her trembling arms

					 					Upon the precincts of this nest of pain,

					 					And side-long fix’d her eye on Saturn’s face:

					 					There saw she direst strife; the supreme God

					 					At war with all the frailty of grief,

					 					Of rage, of fear, anxiety, revenge,

					 					Remorse, spleen, hope, but most of all despair.

					 					Against these plagues he strove in vain: for Fate

					 					Had pour’d a mortal oil upon his head,

					 					A disanointing poison: so that Thea,

					 					Affrighted, kept her still, and let him pass

					 					First onwards in, among the fallen tribe.



				 					As with us mortal men, the laden heart

					 					Is persecuted more, and fever’d more,

					 					When it is nighing to the mournful house

					 					Where other hearts are sick of the same bruise;

					 					So Saturn, as he walk’d into the midst,

					 					Felt faint, and would have sunk among the rest,

					 					But that he met Enceladus’s eye,

					 					Whose mightiness, and awe of him, at once

					 					Came like an inspiration; and he shouted,

					 					“Titans, behold your God!” at which some groan’d;

					 					Some started on their feet; some also shouted;

					 					Some wept, some wail’d⁠—all bow’d with reverence;

					 					And Ops, uplifting her black folded veil,

					 					Show’d her pale cheeks, and all her forehead wan,

					 					Her eyebrows thin and jet, and hollow eyes.

					 					There is a roaring in the bleak-grown pines

					 					When Winter lifts his voice; there is a noise

					 					Among immortals when a God gives sign,

					 					With hushing finger, how he means to load

					 					His tongue with the full weight of utterless thought,

					 					With thunder, and with music, and with pomp:

					 					Such noise is like the roar of bleak-grown pines;

					 					Which, when it ceases in this mountain’d world,

					 					No other sound succeeds; but ceasing here,

					 					Among these fallen, Saturn’s voice therefrom

					 					Grew up like organ, that begins anew

					 					Its strain, when other harmonies, stopt short,

					 					Leave the dinn’d air vibrating silverly.

					 					Thus grew it up:⁠—“Not in my own sad breast,

					 					Which is its own great judge and searcher out,

					 					Can I find reason why ye should be thus:

					 					Not in the legends of the first of days,

					 					Studied from that old spirit-leaved book

					 					Which starry Uranus with finger bright

					 					Saved from the shores of darkness, when the waves

					 					Low-ebb’d still hid it up in shallow gloom;⁠—

					 					And the which book ye know I ever kept

					 					For my firm-based footstool:⁠—Ah, infirm!

					 					Not there, nor in sign, symbol, or portent

					 					Of element, earth, water, air, and fire,⁠—

					 					At war, at peace, or inter-quarrelling

					 					One against one, or two, or three, or all

					 					Each several one against the other three,

					 					As fire with air loud warring when rain-floods

					 					Drown both, and press them both against earth’s face,

					 					Where, finding sulphur, a quadruple wrath

					 					Unhinges the poor world;⁠—not in that strife,

					 					Wherefrom I take strange lore, and read it deep,

					 					Can I find reason why ye should be thus:

					 					No, nowhere can unriddle, though I search,

					 					And pore on nature’s universal scroll

					 					Even to swooning, why ye, Divinities,

					 					The first-born of all shaped and palpable Gods,

					 					Should cower beneath what, in comparison,

					 					Is untremendous might. Yet ye are here,

					 					O’erwhelm’d, and spurn’d, and batter’d, ye are here!

					 					O Titans, shall I say ‘Arise!’⁠—Ye groan:

					 					Shall I say ‘Crouch!’⁠—Ye groan. What can I then?

					 					O Heaven wide! O unseen parent dear!

					 					What can I? Tell me, all ye brethren Gods,

					 					How we can war, how engine our great wrath!

					 					O speak your counsel now, for Saturn’s ear

					 					Is all a-hunger’d. Thou, Oceanus,

					 					Ponderest high and deep; and in thy face

					 					I see, astonied, that severe content

					 					Which comes of thought and musing: give us help!”



				 					So ended Saturn; and the God of the Sea,

					 					Sophist and Sage, from no Athenian grove,

					 					But cogitation in his watery shades,

					 					Arose, with locks not oozy, and began,

					 					In murmurs, which his first-endeavouring tongue

					 					Caught infant-like from the far-foamed sands.

					 					“O ye, whom wrath consumes! who, passion-stung,

					 					Writhe at defeat, and nurse your agonies!

					 					Shut up your senses, stifle up your ears,

					 					My voice is not a bellows unto ire.

					 					Yet listen, ye who will, whilst I bring proof

					 					How ye, perforce, must be content to stoop;

					 					And in the proof much comfort will I give,

					 					If ye will take that comfort in its truth.

					 					We fall by course of Nature’s law, not force

					 					Of thunder, or of Jove. Great Saturn, thou

					 					Has sifted well the atom-universe;

					 					But for this reason, that thou art the King,

					 					And only blind from sheer supremacy,

					 					One avenue was shaded from thine eyes,

					 					Through which I wander’d to eternal truth.

					 					And first, as thou wast not the first of powers.

					 					So art thou not the last; it cannot be;

					 					Thou art not the beginning nor the end.

					 					From chaos and parental darkness came

					 					Light, the first fruits of that intestine broil,

					 					That sullen ferment, which for wondrous ends

					 					Was ripening in itself. The ripe hour came,

					 					And with it light, and light engendering

					 					Upon its own producer, forthwith touch’d

					 					The whole enormous matter into life.

					 					Upon that very hour, our parentage,

					 					The Heavens and the Earth, were manifest:

					 					Then thou first-born, and we the giant-race,

					 					Found ourselves ruling new and beauteous realms.

					 					Now comes the pain of truth, to whom ’tis pain;

					 					O folly! for to bear all naked truths,

					 					And to envisage circumstance, all calm,

					 					That is the top of sovereignty. Mark well!

					 					As Heaven and Earth are fairer, fairer far

					 					Than Chaos and blank Darkness, though once chiefs;

					 					And as we show beyond that Heaven and Earth

					 					In form and shape compact and beautiful,

					 					In will, in action free, companionship,

					 					And thousand other signs of purer life;

					 					So on our heels a fresh perfection treads,

					 					A power more strong in beauty, born of us

					 					And fated to excel us, as we pass

					 					In glory that old Darkness: nor are we

					 					Thereby more conquer’d, than by us the rule

					 					Of shapeless Chaos. Say, doth the dull soil

					 					Quarrel with the proud forests it hath fed,

					 					And feedeth still, more comely than itself?

					 					Can it deny the chiefdom of green groves?

					 					Or shall the tree be envious of the dove

					 					Because it cooeth, and hath snowy wings

					 					To wander wherewithal and find its joys?

					 					We are such forest-trees, and our fair boughs

					 					Have bred forth, not pale solitary doves,

					 					But eagles golden-feather’d, who do tower

					 					Above us in their beauty, and must reign

					 					In right thereof; for ’tis the eternal law

					 					That first in beauty should be first in might:

					 					Yea, by that law, another race may drive

					 					Our conquerors to mourn as we do now.

					 					Have ye beheld the young God of the Seas,

					 					My dispossessor? Have ye seen his face?

					 					Have ye beheld his chariot, foam’d along

					 					By noble winged creatures he hath made?

					 					I saw him on the calmed waters scud,

					 					With such a glow of beauty in his eyes,

					 					That it enforced me to bid sad farewell

					 					To all my empire; farewell sad I took,

					 					And hither came, to see how dolorous fate

					 					Had wrought upon ye; and how I might best

					 					Give consolation in this woe extreme.

					 					Receive the truth and let it be your balm.”



				 					Whether through poz’d conviction, or disdain

					 					They guarded silence, when Oceanus

					 					Left murmuring, what deepest thought can tell?

					 					But so it was, none answer’d for a space,

					 					Save one whom none regarded, Clymene:

					 					And yet she answer’d not, only complain’d,

					 					With hectic lips, and eyes up-looking mild,

					 					Thus wording timidly among the fierce:

					 					“O Father, I am here the simplest voice,

					 					And all my knowledge is that joy is gone,

					 					And this thing woe crept in among our hearts,

					 					There to remain forever, as I fear:

					 					I would not bode of evil, if I thought

					 					So weak a creature could turn off the help

					 					Which by just right should come of mighty Gods;

					 					Yet let me tell my sorrow, let me tell

					 					Of what I heard, and how it made me weep,

					 					And know that we had parted from all hope.

					 					I stood upon a shore, a pleasant shore,

					 					Where a sweet clime was breathed from a land

					 					Of fragrance, quietness, and trees, and flowers.

					 					Full of calm joy it was, as I of grief;

					 					Too full of joy and soft delicious warmth;

					 					So that I felt a movement in my heart

					 					To chide, and to reproach that solitude

					 					With songs of misery, music of our woes;

					 					And sat me down, and took a mouthed shell

					 					And murmur’d into it, and made melody⁠—

					 					O melody no more! for while I sang,

					 					And with poor skill let pass into the breeze

					 					The dull shell’s echo, from a bowery strand

					 					Just opposite, an island of the sea,

					 					There came enchantment with the shifting wind,

					 					That did both drown and keep alive my ears.

					 					I threw my shell away upon the sand,

					 					And a wave fill’d it, as my sense was fill’d

					 					With that new blissful golden melody.

					 					A living death was in each gush of sounds,

					 					Each family of rapturous hurried notes,

					 					That fell, one after one, yet all at once,

					 					Like pearl beads dropping sudden from their string:

					 					And then another, then another strain,

					 					Each like a dove leaving its olive perch,

					 					With music wing’d instead of silent plumes,

					 					To hover round my head, and make me sick

					 					Of joy and grief at once. Grief overcame,

					 					And I was stopping up my frantic ears,

					 					When, past all hindrance of my trembling hands,

					 					A voice came sweeter, sweeter than all tune,

					 					And still it cried, ‘Apollo! young Apollo!

					 					The morning-bright Apollo! young Apollo!’

					 					I fled, it follow’d me, and cried, ‘Apollo!’

					 					O Father, and O Brethren, had ye felt

					 					Those pains of mine; O Saturn, hadst thou felt,

					 					Ye would not call this too indulged tongue

					 					Presumptuous, in thus venturing to be heard.”



				 					So far her voice flow’d on, like timorous brook

					 					That, lingering along a pebbled coast,

					 					Doth fear to meet the sea: but sea it met,

					 					And shudder’d; for the overwhelming voice

					 					Of huge Enceladus swallow’d it in wrath:

					 					The ponderous syllables, like sullen waves

					 					In the half-glutted hollows of reef-rocks,

					 					Came booming thus, while still upon his arm

					 					He lean’d; not rising, from supreme contempt.

					 					“Or shall we listen to the over-wise,

					 					Or to the over-foolish giant, Gods?

					 					Not thunderbolt on thunderbolt, till all

					 					That rebel Jove’s whole armoury were spent,

					 					Not world on world upon these shoulders piled,

					 					Could agonize me more than baby-words

					 					In midst of this dethronement horrible.

					 					Speak! roar! shout! yell! ye sleepy Titans all.

					 					Do ye forget the blows, the buffets vile?

					 					Are ye not smitten by a youngling arm?

					 					Dost thou forget, sham Monarch of the Waves,

					 					Thy scalding in the seas? What! have I roused

					 					Your spleens with so few simple words as these?

					 					O joy! for now I see ye are not lost:

					 					O joy! for now I see a thousand eyes

					 					Wide-glaring for revenge.”⁠—As this he said,

					 					He lifted up his stature vast, and stood,

					 					Still without intermission speaking thus:

					 					“Now ye are flames, I’ll tell you how to burn,

					 					And purge the ether of our enemies;

					 					How to feed fierce the crooked stings of fire,

					 					And singe away the swollen clouds of Jove,

					 					Stifling that puny essence in its tent.

					 					O let him feel the evil he hath done;

					 					For though I scorn Oceanus’s lore,

					 					Much pain have I for more than loss of realms:

					 					The days of peace and slumberous calm are fled;

					 					Those days, all innocent of scathing war,

					 					When all the fair Existences of heaven

					 					Came open-eyed to guess what we would speak:⁠—

					 					That was before our brows were taught to frown,

					 					Before our lips knew else but solemn sounds;

					 					That was before we knew the winged thing,

					 					Victory, might be lost, or might be won,

					 					And be ye mindful that Hyperion,

					 					Our brightest brother, still is undisgraced⁠—

					 					Hyperion, lo! his radiance is here!”



				 					All eyes were on Enceladus’s face,

					 					And they beheld, while still Hyperion’s name

					 					Flew from his lips up to the vaulted rocks,

					 					A pallid gleam across his features stern:

					 					Not savage, for he saw full many a God

					 					Wroth as himself. He look’d upon them all,

					 					And in each face he saw a gleam of light,

					 					But splendider in Saturn’s, whose hoar locks

					 					Shone like the bubbling foam about a keel

					 					When the prow sweeps into a midnight cove.

					 					In pale and silver silence they remain’d,

					 					Till suddenly a splendour, like the morn,

					 					Pervaded all the beetling gloomy steeps,

					 					All the sad spaces of oblivion,

					 					And every gulf, and every chasm old,

					 					And every height, and every sullen depth,

					 					Voiceless, or hoarse with loud tormented streams:

					 					And all the everlasting cataracts,

					 					And all the headlong torrents far and near,

					 					Mantled before in darkness and huge shade,

					 					Now saw the light and made it terrible.

					 					It was Hyperion:⁠—a granite peak

					 					His bright feet touch’d, and there he stay’d to view

					 					The misery his brilliance had betray’d

					 					To the most hateful seeing of itself.

					 					Golden his hair of short Numidian curl,

					 					Regal his shape majestic, a vast shade

					 					In midst of his own brightness, like the bulk

					 					Of Memnon’s image at the set of sun

					 					To one who travels from the dusking East:

					 					Sighs, too, as mournful as that Memnon’s harp,

					 					He utter’d, while his hands contemplative

					 					He press’d together, and in silence stood.

					 					Despondence seized again the fallen Gods

					 					At sight of the dejected King of Day,

					 					And many hid their faces from the light:

					 					But fierce Enceladus sent forth his eyes

					 					Among the brotherhood; and, at their glare,

					 					Uprose Iäpetus, and Creüs too,

					 					And Phorcus, sea-born, and together strode

					 					To where he tower’d on his eminence.

					 					There those four shouted forth old Saturn’s name;

					 					Hyperion from the peak loud answered “Saturn!”

					 					Saturn sat near the Mother of the Gods,

					 					In whose face was no joy, though all the Gods

					 					Gave from their hollow throats the name of “Saturn!”





Book III


				 					Thus in alternate uproar and sad peace,

					 					Amazed were those Titans utterly.

					 					O leave them, Muse! O leave them to their woes;

					 					For thou art weak to sing such tumults dire:

					 					A solitary sorrow best befits

					 					Thy lips, and antheming a lonely grief.

					 					Leave them, O Muse! for thou anon wilt find

					 					Many a fallen old Divinity

					 					Wandering in vain about bewildered shores.

					 					Meantime touch piously the Delphic harp,

					 					And not a wind of heaven but will breathe

					 					In aid soft warble from the Dorian flute;

					 					For lo! ’tis for the Father of all verse.

					 					Flush everything that hath a vermeil hue,

					 					Let the rose glow intense and warm the air,

					 					And let the clouds of even and of morn

					 					Float in voluptuous fleeces o’er the hills;

					 					Let the red wine within the goblet boil,

					 					Cold as a bubbling well; let faint-lipp’d shells,

					 					On sands or in great deeps, vermilion turn

					 					Through all their labyrinths; and let the maid

					 					Blush keenly, as with some warm kiss surprised.

					 					Chief isle of the embowered Cyclades,

					 					Rejoice, O Delos, with thine olives green,

					 					And poplars, and lawn-shading palms, and beech,

					 					In which the Zephyr breathes the loudest song,

					 					And hazels thick, dark-stemm’d beneath the shade:

					 					Apollo is once more the golden theme!

					 					Where was he, when the Giant of the Sun

					 					Stood bright, amid the sorrow of his peers?

					 					Together had he left his mother fair

					 					And his twin-sister sleeping in their bower,

					 					And in the morning twilight wandered forth

					 					Beside the osiers of a rivulet,

					 					Full ankle-deep in lilies of the vale.

					 					The nightingale had ceased, and a few stars

					 					Were lingering in the heavens, while the thrush

					 					Began calm-throated. Throughout all the isle

					 					There was no covert, no retired cave

					 					Unhaunted by the murmurous noise of waves,

					 					Though scarcely heard in many a green recess.

					 					He listen’d, and he wept, and his bright tears

					 					Went trickling down the golden bow he held.

					 					Thus with half-shut suffused eyes he stood,

					 					While from beneath some cumbrous boughs hard by

					 					With solemn step an awful Goddess came,

					 					And there was purport in her looks for him,

					 					Which he with eager guess began to read

					 					Perplex’d, the while melodiously he said:

					 					“How cam’st thou over the unfooted sea?

					 					Or hath that antique mien and robed form

					 					Moved in these vales invisible till now?

					 					Sure I have heard those vestments sweeping o’er

					 					The fallen leaves, when I have sat alone

					 					In cool mid-forest. Surely I have traced

					 					The rustle of those ample skirts about

					 					These grassy solitudes, and seen the flowers

					 					Lift up their heads, and still the whisper pass’d.

					 					Goddess! I have beheld those eyes before,

					 					And their eternal calm, and all that face,

					 					Or I have dream’d.”⁠—“Yes,” said the supreme shape,

					 					“Thou hast dream’d of me; and awaking up

					 					Didst find a lyre all golden by thy side,

					 					Whose strings touch’d by thy fingers, all the vast

					 					Unwearied ear of the whole universe

					 					Listen’d in pain and pleasure at the birth

					 					Of such new tuneful wonder. Is ’t not strange

					 					That thou shouldst weep, so gifted? Tell me, youth,

					 					What sorrow thou canst feel; for I am sad

					 					When thou dost shed a tear: explain thy griefs

					 					To one who in this lonely isle hath been

					 					The watcher of thy sleep and hours of life,

					 					From the young day when first thy infant hand

					 					Pluck’d witless the weak flowers, till thine arm

					 					Could bend that bow heroic to all times.

					 					Show thy heart’s secret to an ancient Power

					 					Who hath forsaken old and sacred thrones

					 					For prophecies of thee, and for the sake

					 					Of loveliness new-born.”⁠—Apollo then,

					 					With sudden scrutiny and gloomless eyes,

					 					Thus answer’d, while his white melodious throat

					 					Throbb’d with the syllables:⁠—“Mnemosyne!

					 					Thy name is on my tongue, I know not how;

					 					Why should I tell thee what thou so well seest?

					 					Why should I strive to show what from thy lips

					 					Would come no mystery? For me, dark, dark,

					 					And painful vile oblivion seals my eyes:

					 					I strive to search wherefore I am so sad,

					 					Until a melancholy numbs my limbs;

					 					And then upon the grass I sit, and moan,

					 					Like one who once had wings.⁠—O why should I

					 					Feel cursed and thwarted, when the liegeless air

					 					Yields to my step aspirant? why should I

					 					Spurn the green turf as hateful to my feet?

					 					Goddess benign, point forth some unknown thing:

					 					Are there not other regions than this isle?

					 					What are the stars? There is the sun, the sun!

					 					And the most patient brilliance of the moon!

					 					And stars by thousands! Point me out the way

					 					To any one particular beauteous star,

					 					And I will flit into it with my lyre,

					 					And make its silvery splendour pant with bliss.

					 					I have heard the cloudy thunder: Where is power?

					 					Whose hand, whose essence, what divinity

					 					Makes this alarum in the elements,

					 					While I here idle listen on the shores

					 					In fearless yet in aching ignorance?

					 					O tell me, lonely Goddess, by thy harp,

					 					That waileth every morn and eventide,

					 					Tell me why thus I rave, about these groves!

					 					Mute thou remainest⁠—Mute! yet I can read

					 					A wondrous lesson in thy silent face:

					 					Knowledge enormous makes a God of me.

					 					Names, deeds, grey legends, dire events, rebellions,

					 					Majesties, sovran voices, agonies,

					 					Creations and destroyings, all at once

					 					Pour into the wide hollows of my brain,

					 					And deify me, as if some blithe wine

					 					Or bright elixir peerless I had drunk,

					 					And so become immortal.”⁠—Thus the God,

					 					While his enkindled eyes, with level glance

					 					Beneath his white soft temples, steadfast kept

					 					Trembling with light upon Mnemosyne.

					 					Soon wild commotions shook him, and made flush

					 					All the immortal fairness of his limbs:

					 					Most like the struggle at the gate of death;

					 					Or liker still to one who should take leave

					 					Of pale immortal death, and with a pang

					 					As hot as death’s is chill, with fierce convulse

					 					Die into life: so young Apollo anguish’d:

					 					His very hair, his golden tresses famed

					 					Kept undulation round his eager neck.

					 					During the pain Mnemosyne upheld

					 					Her arms as one who prophesied.⁠—At length

					 					Apollo shriek’d;⁠—and lo! from all his limbs

					 					Celestial …





The Eve of St. Agnes




I


				 					St. Agnes’ Eve⁠—Ah, bitter chill it was!

					 					The owl, for all his feathers, was a-cold;

					 					The hare limp’d trembling through the frozen grass,

					 					And silent was the flock in woolly fold:

					 					Numb were the Beadsman’s fingers, while he told

					 					His rosary, and while his frosted breath,

					 					Like pious incense from a censer old,

					 					Seem’d taking flight for heaven, without a death,

					 					Past the sweet Virgin’s picture, while his prayer he saith.





II


				 					His prayer he saith, this patient, holy man;

					 					Then takes his lamp, and riseth from his knees,

					 					And back returneth, meagre, barefoot, wan

					 					Along the chapel aisle by slow degrees:

					 					The sculptured dead, on each side, seem to freeze,

					 					Emprison’d in black, purgatorial rails:

					 					Knights, ladies, praying in dumb orat’ries,

					 					He passeth by; and his weak spirit fails

					 					To think how they may ache in icy hoods and mails.





III


				 					Northward he turneth through a little door,

					 					And scarce three steps, ere Music’s golden tongue

					 					Flatter’d to tears this aged man and poor;

					 					But no⁠—already had his death-bell rung;

					 					The joys of all his life were said and sung:

					 					His was harsh penance on St. Agnes’ Eve:

					 					Another way he went, and soon among

					 					Rough ashes sat he for his soul’s reprieve,

					 					And all night kept awake, for sinners’ sake to grieve.





IV


				 					That ancient Beadsman heard the prelude soft;

					 					And so it chanced, for many a door was wide,

					 					From hurry to and fro. Soon, up aloft,

					 					The silver, snarling trumpets ’gan to chide:

					 					The level chambers, ready with their pride,

					 					Were glowing to receive a thousand guests:

					 					The carved angels, ever eager-eyed,

					 					Stared, where upon their heads the cornice rests,

					 					With hair blown back, and wings put crosswise on their breasts.





V


				 					At length burst in the argent revelry,

					 					With plume, tiara, and all rich array,

					 					Numerous as shadows haunting fairily

					 					The brain, new-stuff’d, in youth, with triumphs gay

					 					Of old romance. These let us wish away,

					 					And turn, sole-thoughted, to one Lady there,

					 					Whose heart had brooded, all that wintry day,

					 					On love, and wing’d St. Agnes’ saintly care,

					 					As she had heard old dames full many times declare.





VI


				 					They told her how, upon St. Agnes’ Eve,

					 					Young virgins might have visions of delight,

					 					And soft adorings from their loves receive

					 					Upon the honey’d middle of the night,

					 					If ceremonies due they did aright;

					 					As, supperless to bed they must retire,

					 					And couch supine their beauties, lily white;

					 					Nor look behind, nor sideways, but require

					 					Of Heaven with upward eyes for all that they desire.





VII


				 					Full of this whim was thoughtful Madeline:

					 					The music, yearning like a God in pain,

					 					She scarcely heard: her maiden eyes divine,

					 					Fix’d on the floor, saw many a sweeping train

					 					Pass by⁠—she heeded not at all: in vain

					 					Came many a tiptoe, amorous cavalier,

					 					And back retired; not cool’d by high disdain,

					 					But she saw not: her heart was otherwhere;

					 					She sigh’d for Agnes’ dreams, the sweetest of the year.





VIII


				 					She danced along with vague, regardless eyes,

					 					Anxious her lips, her breathing quick and short:

					 					The hallow’d hour was near at hand: she sighs

					 					Amid the timbrels, and the throng’d resort

					 					Of whisperers in anger, or in sport;

					 					’Mid looks of love, defiance, hate, and scorn,

					 					Hoodwink’d with faery fancy; all amort,

					 					Save to St. Agnes and her lambs unshorn,

					 					And all the bliss to be before to-morrow morn.





IX


				 					So, purposing each moment to retire,

					 					She linger’d still. Meantime, across the moors,

					 					Had come young Porphyro, with heart on fire

					 					For Madeline. Beside the portal doors,

					 					Buttress’d from moonlight, stands he, and implores

					 					All saints to give him sight of Madeline,

					 					But for one moment in the tedious hours,

					 					That he might gaze and worship all unseen;

					 					Perchance speak, kneel, touch, kiss⁠—in sooth such things have been.





X


				 					He ventures in: let no buzz’d whisper tell:

					 					All eyes be muffled, or a hundred swords

					 					Will storm his heart. Love’s fev’rous citadel:

					 					For him, those chambers held barbarian hordes,

					 					Hyena foemen, and hot-blooded lords,

					 					Whose very dogs would execrations howl

					 					Against his lineage: not one breast affords

					 					Him any mercy, in that mansion foul,

					 					Save one old beldame, weak in body and in soul.





XI


				 					Ah, happy chance! the aged creature came,

					 					Shuffling along with ivory-headed wand,

					 					To where he stood, hid from the torch’s flame,

					 					Behind a broad hall-pillar, far beyond

					 					The sound of merriment and chorus bland:

					 					He startled her; but soon she knew his face,

					 					And grasp’d his fingers in her palsied hand,

					 					Saying, “Mercy, Porphyro! hie thee from this place;

					 					They are all here to-night, the whole bloodthirsty race!





XII


				 					“Get hence! get hence! there’s dwarfish Hildebrand;

					 					He had a fever late, and in the fit

					 					He cursed thee and thine, both house and land:

					 					Then there’s that old Lord Maurice, not a whit

					 					More tame for his gray hairs⁠—Alas me! flit!

					 					Flit like a ghost away.”⁠—“Ah, Gossip dear,

					 					We’re safe enough; here in this armchair sit,

					 					And tell me how”⁠—“Good Saints! not here, not here;

					 					Follow me, child, or else these stones will be thy bier.”





XIII


				 					He follow’d through a lowly arched way,

					 					Brushing the cobwebs with his lofty plume;

					 					And as she mutter’d “Well-a⁠—well-a-day!”

					 					He found him in a little moonlight room,

					 					Pale, latticed, chill, and silent as a tomb.

					 					“Now tell me where is Madeline,” said he,

					 					“O tell me, Angela, by the holy loom

					 					Which none but secret sisterhood may see,

					 					When they St. Agnes’ wool are weaving piously.”





XIV


				 					“St. Agnes! Ah! it is St. Agnes’ Eve⁠—

					 					Yet men will murder upon holy days:

					 					Thou must hold water in a witch’s sieve,

					 					And be liege-lord of all the Elves and Fays,

					 					To venture so: it fills me with amaze

					 					To see thee, Porphyro!⁠—St. Agnes’ Eve!

					 					God’s help! my lady fair the conjurer plays

					 					This very night: good angels her deceive!

					 					But let me laugh awhile, I’ve mickle time to grieve.”





XV


				 					Feebly she laugheth in the languid moon,

					 					While Porphyro upon her face doth look,

					 					Like puzzled urchin on an aged crone

					 					Who keepeth closed a wond’rous riddle-book,

					 					As spectacled she sits in chimney nook.

					 					But soon his eyes grew brilliant, when she told

					 					His lady’s purpose; and he scarce could brook

					 					Tears, at the thought of those enchantments cold,

					 					And Madeline asleep in lap of legends old.





XVI


				 					Sudden a thought came like a full-blown rose,

					 					Flushing his brow, and in his pained heart

					 					Made purple riot: then doth he propose

					 					A stratagem, that makes the beldame start:

					 					“A cruel man and impious thou art:

					 					Sweet lady, let her pray, and sleep, and dream

					 					Alone with her good angels, far apart

					 					From wicked men like thee. Go, go! I deem

					 					Thou canst not surely be the same that thou didst seem.”





XVII


				 					“I will not harm her, by all saints I swear,”

					 					Quoth Porphyro: “O may I ne’er find grace

					 					When my weak voice shall whisper its last prayer,

					 					If one of her soft ringlets I displace,

					 					Or look with ruffian passion in her face:

					 					Good Angela, believe me by these tears;

					 					Or I will, even in a moment’s space,

					 					Awake, with horrid shout, my foemen’s ears,

					 					And beard them, though they be more fang’d than wolves and bears.”





XVIII


				 					“Ah! why wilt thou affright a feeble soul?

					 					A poor, weak, palsy-stricken, church-yard thing,

					 					Whose passing-bell may ere the midnight toll;

					 					Whose prayers for thee, each morn and evening,

					 					Were never miss’d.” Thus plaining, doth she bring

					 					A gentler speech from burning Porphyro;

					 					So woful, and of such deep sorrowing,

					 					That Angela gives promise she will do

					 					Whatever he shall wish, betide her weal or woe.





XIX


				 					Which was, to lead him, in close secrecy,

					 					Even to Madeline’s chamber, and there hide

					 					Him in a closet, of such privacy

					 					That he might see her beauty unespied,

					 					And win perhaps that night a peerless bride,

					 					While legion’d fairies paced the coverlet,

					 					And pale enchantment held her sleepy-eyed.

					 					Never on such a night have lovers met,

					 					Since Merlin paid his Demon all the monstrous debt.





XX


				 					“It shall be as thou wishest,” said the Dame:

					 					“All cates and dainties shall be stored there

					 					Quickly on this feast-night: by the tambour frame

					 					Her own lute thou wilt see: no time to spare,

					 					For I am slow and feeble, and scarce dare

					 					On such a catering trust my dizzy head.

					 					Wait here, my child, with patience; kneel in prayer

					 					The while: Ah! thou must needs the lady wed,

					 					Or may I never leave my grave among the dead.”





XXI


				 					So saying she hobbled off with busy fear.

					 					The lover’s endless minutes slowly pass’d;

					 					The Dame return’d, and whisper’d in his ear

					 					To follow her; with aged eyes aghast

					 					From fright of dim espial. Safe at last,

					 					Through many a dusky gallery, they gain

					 					The maiden’s chamber, silken, hush’d and chaste;

					 					Where Porphyro took covert, pleased amain.

					 					His poor guide hurried back with agues in her brain.





XXII


				 					Her falt’ring hand upon the balustrade,

					 					Old Angela was feeling for the stair,

					 					When Madeline, St. Agnes’ charmed maid,

					 					Rose, like a mission’d spirit, unaware:

					 					With silver taper’s light, and pious care,

					 					She turn’d, and down the aged gossip led

					 					To a safe level matting. Now prepare,

					 					Young Porphyro, for gazing on that bed;

					 					She comes, she comes again, like ring-dove fray’d and fled.





XXIII


				 					Out went the taper as she hurried in;

					 					Its little smoke, in pallid moonshine, died:

					 					She closed the door, she panted, all akin

					 					To spirits of the air, and visions wide:

					 					No uttered syllable, or, woe betide!

					 					But to her heart, her heart was voluble,

					 					Paining with eloquence her balmy side;

					 					As though a tongueless nightingale should swell

					 					Her throat in vain, and die, heart-stifled in her dell.





XXIV


				 					A casement high and triple arch’d there was,

					 					All garlanded with carven imag’ries

					 					Of fruits, and flowers, and bunches of knot-grass,

					 					And diamonded with panes of quaint device,

					 					Innumerable of stains and splendid dyes,

					 					As are the tiger-moth’s deep-damask’d wings;

					 					And in the midst, ’mong thousand heraldries,

					 					And twilight saints, and dim emblazonings,

					 					A shielded scutcheon blush’d with blood of queens and kings.





XXV


				 					Full on this casement shone the wintry moon,

					 					And threw warm gules on Madeline’s fair breast,

					 					As down she knelt for heaven’s grace and boon;

					 					Rose-bloom fell on her hands, together prest,

					 					And on her silver cross soft amethyst,

					 					And on her hair a glory, like a saint:

					 					She seem’d a splendid angel, newly drest,

					 					Save wings, for heaven:⁠—Porphyro grew faint;

					 					She knelt, so pure a thing, so free from mortal taint.





XXVI


				 					Anon his heart revives: her vespers done,

					 					Of all its wreathed pearls her hair she frees;

					 					Unclasps her warmed jewels one by one;

					 					Loosens her fragrant bodice; by degrees

					 					Her rich attire creeps rustling to her knees:

					 					Half-hidden, like a mermaid in sea-weed,

					 					Pensive awhile she dreams awake, and sees,

					 					In fancy, fair St. Agnes in her bed,

					 					But dares not look behind, or all the charm is fled.





XXVII


				 					Soon, trembling in her soft and chilly nest,

					 					In sort of wakeful swoon, perplex’d she lay,

					 					Until the poppied warmth of sleep oppress’d

					 					Her soothed limbs, and soul fatigued away;

					 					Flown, like a thought, until the morrow-day;

					 					Blissfully haven’d both from joy and pain;

					 					Clasp’d like a missal where swart Paynims pray;

					 					Blinded alike from sunshine and from rain,

					 					As though a rose should shut, and be a bud again.





XXVIII


				 					Stol’n to this paradise, and so entranced,

					 					Porphyro gazed upon her empty dress,

					 					And listen’d to her breathing, if it chanced

					 					To wake into a slumberous tenderness;

					 					Which when he heard, that minute did he bless,

					 					And breathed himself: then from the closet crept,

					 					Noiseless as fear in a wide wilderness,

					 					And over the hush’d carpet, silent, stept,

					 					And ’tween the curtains peep’d, where, lo!⁠—how fast she slept.





XXIX


				 					Then by the bed-side, where the faded moon

					 					Made a dim, silver twilight, soft he set

					 					A table, and, half-anguish’d, threw thereon

					 					A cloth of woven crimson, gold, and jet:⁠—

					 					O for some drowsy Morphean amulet!

					 					The boisterous, midnight, festive clarion,

					 					The kettle-drum, and far-heard clarionet,

					 					Affray his ears, though but in dying tone:⁠—

					 					The hall-door shuts again, and all the noise is gone.





XXX


				 					And still she slept an azure-lidded sleep,

					 					In blanched linen, smooth, and lavender’d,

					 					While he from forth the closet brought a heap

					 					Of candied apple, quince, and plum, and gourd;

					 					With jellies soother than the creamy curd,

					 					And lucent syrops, tinct with cinnamon;

					 					Manna and dates, in argosy transferr’d

					 					From Fez; and spiced dainties, every one,

					 					From silken Samarcand to cedar’d Lebanon.





XXXI


				 					These delicates he heap’d with glowing hand

					 					On golden dishes and in baskets bright

					 					Of wreathed silver: sumptuous they stand

					 					In the retired quiet of the night,

					 					Filling the chilly room with perfume light.⁠—

					 					“And now, my love, my seraph fair, awake!

					 					Thou art my heaven, and I thine eremite:

					 					Open thine eyes, for meek St. Agnes’ sake,

					 					Or I shall drowse beside thee, so my soul doth ache.”





XXXII


				 					Thus whispering, his warm, unnerved arm

					 					Sank in her pillow. Shaded was her dream

					 					By the dusk curtains:⁠—’twas a midnight charm

					 					Impossible to melt as iced stream:

					 					The lustrous salvers in the moonlight gleam;

					 					Broad golden fringe upon the carpet lies:

					 					It seem’d he never, never could redeem

					 					From such a steadfast spell his lady’s eyes;

					 					So mused awhile, entoil’d in woofed phantasies.





XXXIII


				 					Awakening up, he took her hollow lute,⁠—

					 					Tumultuous,⁠—and, in chords that tenderest be,

					 					He play’d an ancient ditty, long since mute,

					 					In Provence call’d “La belle dame sans mercy:”

					 					Close to her ear touching the melody;⁠—

					 					Wherewith disturb’d, she utter’d a soft moan:

					 					He ceased⁠—she panted quick⁠—and suddenly

					 					Her blue affrayed eyes wide open shone:

					 					Upon his knees he sank, pale as smooth-sculptured stone.





XXXIV


				 					Her eyes were open, but she still beheld,

					 					Now wide awake, the vision of her sleep:

					 					There was a painful change, that nigh expell’d

					 					The blisses of her dream so pure and deep

					 					At which fair Madeline began to weep,

					 					And moan forth witless words with many a sigh;

					 					While still her gaze on Porphyro would keep;

					 					Who knelt, with joined hands and piteous eye,

					 					Fearing to move or speak, she look’d so dreamingly.





XXXV


				 					“Ah, Porphyro!” said she, “but even now

					 					Thy voice was at sweet tremble in mine ear,

					 					Made tuneable with every sweetest vow;

					 					And those sad eyes were spiritual and clear:

					 					How changed thou art! how pallid, chill, and drear!

					 					Give me that voice again, my Porphyro,

					 					Those looks immortal, those complainings dear!

					 					Oh leave me not in this eternal woe,

					 					For if thou diest, my Love, I know not where to go.”





XXXVI


				 					Beyond a mortal man impassion’d far

					 					At these voluptuous accents, he arose,

					 					Ethereal, flush’d, and like a throbbing star

					 					Seen mid the sapphire heaven’s deep repose;

					 					Into her dream he melted, as the rose

					 					Blendeth its odour with the violet,⁠—

					 					Solution sweet: meantime the frost-wind blows

					 					Like Love’s alarum pattering the sharp sleet

					 					Against the window-panes; St. Agnes’ moon hath set.





XXXVII


				 					’Tis dark: quick pattereth the flaw-blown sleet

					 					“This is no dream, my bride, my Madeline!”

					 					’Tis dark: the iced gusts still rave and beat:

					 					“No dream, alas! alas! and woe is mine!

					 					Porphyro will leave me here to fade and pine.⁠—

					 					Cruel! what traitor could thee hither bring?

					 					I curse not, for my heart is lost in thine,

					 					Though thou forsakest a deceived thing;⁠—

					 					A dove forlorn and lost with sick unpruned wing.”





XXXVIII


				 					“My Madeline! sweet dreamer! lovely bride!

					 					Say, may I be for aye thy vassal blest?

					 					Thy beauty’s shield, heart-shaped and vermeil dyed?

					 					Ah, silver shrine, here will I take my rest

					 					After so many hours of toil and quest,

					 					A famish’d pilgrim,⁠—saved by miracle.

					 					Though I have found, I will not rob thy nest

					 					Saving of thy sweet self; if thou think’st well

					 					To trust, fair Madeline, to no rude infidel.





XXXIX


				 					“Hark! ’tis an elfin storm from faery land,

					 					Of haggard seeming, but a boon indeed:

					 					Arise⁠—arise! the morning is at hand:⁠—

					 					The bloated wassailers will never heed:⁠—

					 					Let us away, my love, with happy speed;

					 					There are no ears to hear, or eyes to see,⁠—

					 					Drown’d all in Rhenish and the sleepy mead:

					 					Awake! arise! my love, and fearless be,

					 					For o’er the southern moors I have a home for thee.”





XL


				 					She hurried at his words, beset with fears,

					 					For there were sleeping dragons all around,

					 					At glaring watch, perhaps, with ready spears⁠—

					 					Down the wide stairs a darkling way they found.⁠—

					 					In all the house was heard no human sound.

					 					A chain-droopd lamp was flickering by each door;

					 					The arras, rich with horseman, hawk, and hound,

					 					Flutter’d in the besieging wind’s uproar;

					 					And the long carpets rose along the gusty floor.





XLI


				 					They glide, like phantoms, into the wide hall;

					 					Like phantoms to the iron porch they glide,

					 					Where lay the Porter, in uneasy sprawl,

					 					With a huge empty flagon by his side:

					 					The wakeful bloodhound rose, and shook his hide,

					 					But his sagacious eye an inmate owns:

					 					By one, and one, the bolts full easy slide:⁠—

					 					The chains lie silent on the footworn stones;⁠—

					 					The key turns, and the door upon its hinges groans.





XLII


				 					And they are gone: aye, ages long ago

					 					These lovers fled away into the storm.

					 					That night the Baron dreamt of many a woe,

					 					And all his warrior-guests, with shade and form

					 					Of witch, and demon, and large coffin-worm,

					 					Were long be-nightmared. Angela the old

					 					Died palsy-twitch’d, with meagre face deform:

					 					The Beadsman, after thousand aves told,

					 					For aye unsought-for slept among his ashes cold.





				The Eve of St. Mark 				A Fragment




			 				Upon a Sabbath-day it fell;

				 				Twice holy was the Sabbath-bell,

				 				That call’d the folk to evening prayer;

				 				The city streets were clean and fair

				 				From wholesome drench of April rains;

				 				And, on the western window panes,

				 				The chilly sunset faintly told

				 				Of unmatured green valleys cold,

				 				Of the green thorny bloomless hedge,

				 				Of rivers new with spring-tide sedge,

				 				Of primroses by shelter’d rills,

				 				And daisies on the aguish hills.

				 				Twice holy was the Sabbath-bell:

				 				The silent streets were crowded well

				 				With staid and pious companies,

				 				Warm from their fireside orat’ries;

				 				And moving, with demurest air,

				 				To even-song, and vesper prayer.

				 				Each arched porch, and entry low,

				 				Was fill’d with patient folk and slow,

				 				With whispers hush, and shuffling feet,

				 				While play’d the organ loud and sweet.



			 				The bells had ceased, the prayers begun,

				 				And Bertha had not yet half done

				 				A curious volume, patch’d and torn,

				 				That all day long, from earliest morn,

				 				Had taken captive her two eyes,

				 				Among its golden broideries;

				 				Perplex’d her with a thousand things,⁠—

				 				The stars of Heaven, and angels’ wings,

				 				Martyrs in a fiery blaze,

				 				Azure saints and silver rays,

				 				Moses’ breastplate and the seven

				 				Candlesticks John saw in Heaven,

				 				The winged Lion of Saint Mark,

				 				And the Covenantal Ark,

				 				With its many mysteries,

				 				Cherubim and golden mice.



			 				Bertha was a maiden fair,

				 				Dwelling in th’ old Minster-square;

				 				From her fireside she could see,

				 				Sidelong, its rich antiquity,

				 				Far as the Bishop’s garden wall;

				 				Where sycamores and elm-trees tall,

				 				Full-leaved, the forest had outstript,

				 				By no sharp north-wind ever nipt,

				 				So shelter’d by the mighty pile.

				 				Bertha arose, and read awhile,

				 				With forehead ’gainst the window-pane.

				 				Again she tried, and then again,

				 				Until the dusk eve left her dark

				 				Upon the legend of St. Mark.

				 				From plaited lawn-frill, fine and thin,

				 				She lifted up her soft warm chin,

				 				With aching neck and swimming eyes,

				 				And dazed with saintly imag’ries.



			 				All was gloom, and silent all,

				 				Save now and then the still foot-fall

				 				Of one returning homewards late,

				 				Past the echoing minster-gate.

				 				The clamorous daws, that all the day

				 				Above tree-tops and towers play,

				 				Pair by pair had gone to rest,

				 				Each in its ancient belfry-nest,

				 				Where asleep they fall betimes,

				 				To music and the drowsy chimes.



			 				All was silent, all was gloom,

				 				Abroad and in the homely room:

				 				Down she sat, poor cheated soul!

				 				And struck a lamp from the dismal coal;

				 				Lean’d forward, with bright drooping hair

				 				And slant book, full against the glare.

				 				Her shadow, in uneasy guise,

				 				Hover’d about, a giant size,

				 				On ceiling-beam and old oak chair,

				 				The parrot’s cage, and panel-square;

				 				And the warm angled winter-screen,

				 				On which were many monsters seen,

				 				Call’d doves of Siam, Lima mice,

				 				And legless birds of Paradise,

				 				Macaw, and tender Avadavat,

				 				And silken-furr’d Angora cat.

				 				Untired she read, her shadow still

				 				Glower’d about, as it would fill

				 				The room with wildest forms and shades,

				 				As though some ghostly queen of spades

				 				Had come to mock behind her back,

				 				And dance, and ruffle her garments black.

				 				Untired she read the legend page,

				 				Of holy Mark, from youth to age,

				 				On land, on sea, in pagan chains,

				 				Rejoicing for his many pains.

				 				Sometimes the learned eremite,

				 				With golden star, or dagger bright,

				 				Referr’d to pious poesies

				 				Written in smallest crow-quill size

				 				Beneath the text; and thus the rhyme

				 				Was parcell’d out from time to time:

				 				⸺“Als writith he of swevenis,

				 				Men han beforne they wake in bliss,

				 				Whanne that hir friendes thinke him bound

				 				In crimped shroude farre under grounde;

				 				And how a litling child mote be

				 				A saint er its nativitie,

				 				Gif that the modre (God her blesse!)

				 				Kepen in solitarinesse,

				 				And kissen devoute the holy croce,

				 				Of Goddes love, and Sathan’s force,⁠—

				 				He writith; and thinges many mo

				 				Of swiche thinges I may not show.

				 				Bot I must tellen verilie

				 				Somdel of Saintè Cicilie,

				 				And chieflie what he auctorethe

				 				Of Saintè Markis life and dethe:”



			 				At length her constant eyelids come

				 				Upon the fervent martyrdom;

				 				Then lastly to his holy shrine,

				 				Exalt amid the tapers’ shine

				 				At Venice,⁠⸺⁠





Ode on Indolence


				 					“They Toil Not, Neither Do They Spin.”





I


				 					One morn before me were three figures seen,

					 					With bowed necks, and joined hands, side-faced;

					 					And one behind the other stepp’d serene,

					 					In placid sandals, and in white robes graced;

					 					They pass’d, like figures on a marble urn,

					 					When shifted round to see the other side;

					 					They came again; as when the urn once more

					 					Is shifted round, the first seen shades return;

					 					And they were strange to me, as may betide

					 					With vases, to one deep in Phidian lore.





II


				 					How is it, Shadows! that I knew ye not?

					 					How came ye muffled in so hush a mask?

					 					Was it a silent deep-disguised plot

					 					To steal away, and leave without a task

					 					My idle days? Ripe was the drowsy hour;

					 					The blissful cloud of summer-indolence

					 					Benumb’d my eyes; my pulse grew less and less;

					 					Pain had no sting, and pleasure’s wreath no flower:

					 					O, why did ye not melt, and leave my sense

					 					Unhaunted quite of all but⁠—nothingness?





III


				 					A third time pass’d they by, and, passing, turn’d

					 					Each one the face a moment whiles to me;

					 					Then faded, and to follow them I burn’d

					 					And ached for wings, because I knew the three;

					 					The first was a fair Maid, and Love her name;

					 					The second was Ambition, pale of cheek,

					 					And ever watchful with fatigued eye;

					 					The last, whom I love more, the more of blame

					 					Is heap’d upon her, maiden most unmeek,⁠—

					 					I knew to be my demon Poesy.





IV


				 					They faded, and, forsooth! I wanted wings:

					 					O folly! What is Love? and where is it?

					 					And for that poor Ambition! it springs

					 					From a man’s little heart’s short fever-fit;

					 					For Poesy!⁠—no,⁠—she has not a joy,⁠—

					 					At least for me,⁠—so sweet as drowsy noons,

					 					And evenings steep’d in honied indolence;

					 					O, for an age so shelter’d from annoy,

					 					That I may never know how change the moons,

					 					Or hear the voice of busy common-sense!





V


				 					And once more came they by;⁠—alas! wherefore?

					 					My sleep had been embroider’d with dim dreams;

					 					My soul had been a lawn besprinkled o’er

					 					With flowers, and stirring shades, and baffled beams:

					 					The morn was clouded, but no shower fell,

					 					Tho’ in her lids hung the sweet tears of May;

					 					The open casement press’d a new-leaved vine,

					 					Let in the budding warmth and throstle’s lay;

					 					O Shadows! ’twas a time to bid farewell!

					 					Upon your skirts had fallen no tears of mine.





VI


				 					So, ye three Ghosts, adieu! Ye cannot raise

					 					My head cool-bedded in the flowery grass;

					 					For I would not be dieted with praise,

					 					A pet-lamb in a sentimental farce!

					 					Fade softly from my eyes and be once more

					 					In masque-like figures on the dreamy urn;

					 					Farewell! I yet have visions for the night,

					 					And for the day faint visions there is store;

					 					Vanish, ye Phantoms! from my idle spright,

					 					Into the clouds, and nevermore return!





Ode on a Grecian Urn




I


				 					Thou still unravish’d bride of quietness,

					 					Thou foster-child of Silence and slow Time,

					 					Sylvan historian, who canst thus express

					 					A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme:

					 					What leaf-fringed legend haunts about thy shape

					 					Of deities or mortals, or of both,

					 					In Tempe or the dales of Arcady?

					 					What men or gods are these? what maidens loth?

					 					What mad pursuit? What struggle to escape?

					 					What pipes and timbrels? What wild ecstacy?





II


				 					Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard

					 					Are sweeter; therefore, ye soft pipes, play on;

					 					Not to the sensual ear, but, more endear’d

					 					Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone:

					 					Fair youth, beneath the trees, thou canst not leave

					 					Thy song, nor ever can those trees be bare;

					 					Bold Lover, never, never canst thou kiss,

					 					Though winning near the goal⁠—yet, do not grieve;

					 					She cannot fade, though thou hast not thy bliss,

					 					For ever wilt thou love, and she be fair!





III


				 					Ah, happy, happy boughs! that cannot shed

					 					Your leaves, nor ever bid the Spring adieu;

					 					And, happy melodist, unwearied,

					 					For ever piping songs for ever new:

					 					More happy love! more happy, happy love!

					 					For ever warm and still to be enjoy’d,

					 					For ever panting, and for ever young;

					 					All breathing human passion far above,

					 					That leaves a heart high-sorrowful and cloy’d,

					 					A burning forehead, and a parching tongue.





IV


				 					Who are these coming to the sacrifice?

					 					To what green altar, O mysterious priest,

					 					Lead’st thou that heifer lowing at the skies,

					 					And all her silken flanks with garlands drest?

					 					What little town by river or sea shore,

					 					Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,

					 					Is emptied of this folk, this pious morn?

					 					And, little town, thy streets for evermore

					 					Will silent be; and not a soul to tell

					 					Why thou art desolate, can e’er return.





V


				 					O Attic shade! Fair attitude! with brede

					 					Of marble men and maidens overwrought,

					 					With forest branches and the trodden weed;

					 					Thou, silent form, dost tease us out of thought

					 					As doth eternity: Cold Pastoral!

					 					When old age shall this generation waste,

					 					Thou shalt remain, in midst of other woe

					 					Than ours, a friend to man, to whom thou say’st,

					 					“Beauty is truth, truth beauty,”⁠—that is all

					 					Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.





Ode on Melancholy




I


				 					No, no! go not to Lethe, neither twist

					 					Wolf’s-bane, tight-rooted, for its poisonous wine;

					 					Nor suffer thy pale forehead to be kiss’d

					 					By nightshade, ruby grape of Proserpine;

					 					Make not your rosary of yew-berries,

					 					Nor let the beetle, or the death-moth be

					 					Your mournful Psyche, nor the downy owl

					 					A partner in your sorrow’s mysteries;

					 					For shade to shade will come too drowsily,

					 					And drown the wakeful anguish of the soul.





II


				 					But when the melancholy fit shall fall

					 					Sudden from heaven like a weeping cloud,

					 					That fosters the droop-headed flowers all,

					 					And hides the green hills in an April shroud;

					 					Then glut thy sorrow on a morning rose,

					 					Or on the rainbow of the salt-sand wave,

					 					Or on the wealth of globed peonies;

					 					Or if thy mistress some rich anger shows,

					 					Emprison her soft hand, and let her rave,

					 					And feed deep, deep upon her peerless eyes.





III


				 					She dwells with Beauty⁠—Beauty that must die;

					 					And Joy, whose hand is ever at his lips

					 					Bidding adieu; and aching Pleasure nigh,

					 					Turning to poison while the bee-mouth sips:

					 					Aye, in the very temple of Delight

					 					Veil’d Melancholy has her sovran shrine,

					 					Though seen of none save him whose strenuous tongue

					 					Can burst Joy’s grape against his palate fine;

					 					His soul shall taste the sadness of her might,

					 					And be among her cloudy trophies hung.





Sonnet


			 				Why did I laugh to-night? No voice will tell;

				 				No God, no Demon of severe response,

				 				Deigns to reply from Heaven or from Hell:

				 				Then to my human heart I turn at once.

				 				Heart! Thou and I are here sad and alone;

				 				I say, why did I laugh? O mortal pain!

				 				O Darkness! Darkness! ever must I moan,

				 				To question Heaven and Hell and Heart in vain.

				 				Why did I laugh? I know this Being’s lease,

				 				My fancy to its utmost blisses spreads;

				 				Yet would I on this very midnight cease,

				 				And the world’s gaudy ensigns see in shreds;

				 				Verse, Fame, and Beauty are intense indeed,

				 				But Death intenser⁠—Death is Life’s high meed.





A Dream, After Reading Dante’s Episode of “Paolo and Francesca”


			 				As Hermes once rook to his feathers light,

				 				When lulled Argus, baffled, swoon’d and slept

				 				So on a Delphic reed, my idle spright

				 				So play’d, so charm’d, so conquer’d, so bereft

				 				The dragon-world in all its hundred eyes;

				 				And seeing it asleep, so fled away⁠—

				 				Not to pure Ida with its snow-cold skies,

				 				Nor unto Tempe where Jove grieved a day;

				 				But to that second circle of sad hell,

				 				Where ’mid the gust, the whirlwind, and the flaw

				 				Of rain and hail-stones, lovers need not tell

				 				Their sorrows. Pale were the sweet lips I saw,

				 				Pale were the lips I kiss’d, and fair the form

				 				I floated with, about that melancholy storm.





Ode to Fanny


			 				Physician Nature! let my spirit blood!

				 				O ease my heart of verse and let me rest;

				 				Throw me upon thy Tripod, till the flood

				 				Of stifling numbers ebbs from my full breast.

				 				A theme! a theme! great Nature! give a theme;

				 				Let me begin my dream.

				 				I come⁠—I see thee, as thou standest there;

				 				Beckon me not into the wintry air.



			 				Ah! dearest love, sweet home of all my fears,

				 				And hopes, and joys, and panting miseries,⁠—

				 				To-night, if I may guess, thy beauty wears

				 				A smile of such delight,

				 				As brilliant and as bright,

				 				As when with ravish’d, aching, vassal eyes,

				 				Lost in soft amaze,

				 				I gaze, I gaze!



			 				Who now, with greedy looks, eats up my feast?

				 				What stare outfaces now my silver moon!

				 				Ah! keep that hand unravished at the least;

				 				Let, let the amorous burn⁠—

				 				But, pr’ythee, do not turn

				 				The current of your heart from me so soon.

				 				O! save, in charity,

				 				The quickest pulse for me.



			 				Save it for me, sweet love! though music breathe

				 				Voluptuous visions into the warm air,

				 				Though swimming through the dance’s dangerous wreath;

				 				Be like an April day

				 				Smiling and cold and gay,

				 				A temperate lily, temperate as fair;

				 				Then, Heaven! there will be

				 				A warmer June for me.



			 				Why, this⁠—you’ll say, my Fanny! is not true:

				 				Put your soft hand upon your snowy side,

				 				Where the heart beats: confess⁠—’tis nothing new⁠—

				 				Must not a woman be

				 				A feather on the sea,

				 				Sway’d to and fro by every wind and tide?

				 				Of as uncertain speed

				 				As blow-ball from the mead?



			 				I know it⁠—and to know it is despair

				 				To one who loves you as I love, sweet Fanny!

				 				Whose heart goes fluttering for you everywhere,

				 				Nor, when away you roam,

				 				Dare keep its wretched home:

				 				Love, love alone, has pains severe and many:

				 				Then, loveliest! keep me free

				 				From torturing jealousy.



			 				Ah! if you prize my subdued soul above

				 				The poor, the fading, brief pride of an hour;

				 				Let none profane my Holy See of love,

				 				Or with a rude hand break

				 				The sacramental cake:

				 				Let none else touch the just new-budded flower;

				 				If not⁠—may my eyes close,

				 				Love! on their last repose.





				La Belle Dame Sans Merci




I


				 					Ah, what can ail thee, wretched wight,

					 					Alone and palely loitering?

					 					The sedge is wither’d from the lake,

					 					And no birds sing.





II


				 					Ah, what can ail thee, wretched wight,

					 					So haggard and so woe-begone?

					 					The squirrel’s granary is full,

					 					And the harvest’s done.





III


				 					I see a lily on thy brow,

					 					With anguish moist and fever dew;

					 					And on thy cheek a fading rose

					 					Fast withereth too.





IV


				 					I met a lady in the meads,

					 					Full beautiful⁠—a faery’s child;

					 					Her hair was long, her foot was light,

					 					And her eyes were wild.





V


				 					I set her on my pacing steed,

					 					And nothing else saw all day long,

					 					For sideways would she lean, and sing

					 					A faery’s song.





VI


				 					I made a garland for her head,

					 					And bracelets too, and fragrant zone;

					 					She look’d at me as she did love,

					 					And made sweet moan.





VII


				 					She found me roots of relish sweet,

					 					And honey wild, and manna dew;

					 					And sure in language strange she said⁠—

					 					“I love thee true.”





VIII


				 					She took me to her elfin grot,

					 					And there she gazed, and sighed deep,

					 					And there I shut her wild wild eyes

					 					So kiss’d to sleep.





IX


				 					And there we slumber’d on the moss,

					 					And there I dream’d⁠—Ah! woe betide!

					 					The latest dream I ever dream’d

					 					On the cold hill side.





X


				 					I saw pale kings, and princes too,

					 					Pale warriors, death-pale were they all;

					 					They cried⁠—“La Belle Dame sans Merci

					 					Hath thee in thrall!”





XI


				 					I saw their starved lips in the gloam,

					 					With horrid warning gaped wide,

					 					And I awoke, and found me here

					 					On the cold hill side.





XII


				 					And this is why I sojourn here,

					 					Alone and palely loitering,

					 					Though the sedge is wither’d from the lake,

					 					And no birds sing.





Chorus of Fairies


			Fire, Air, Earth, And Water Salamander, Zephyr, Dusketha, and Breama

			 				Salamander

			 				Happy, happy glowing fire!



			 				Zephyr

			 				Fragrant air! delicious light!



			 				Dusketha

			 				Let me to my glooms retire!



			 				Breama

			 				I to green-weed rivers bright!



			 				Salamander

			 				Happy, happy glowing fire!

				 				Dazzling bowers of soft retire,

				 				Ever let my nourish’d wing,

				 				Like a bat’s, still wandering,

				 				Faintly fan your fiery spaces,

				 				Spirit sole in deadly places.

				 				In unhaunted roar and blaze,

				 				Open eyes that never daze,

				 				Let me see the myriad shapes

				 				Of men, and beasts, and fish, and apes,

				 				Portray’d in many a fiery den,

				 				And wrought by spumy bitumen.

				 				On the deep intenser roof,

				 				Arched every way, aloof,

				 				Let me breathe upon my skies,

				 				And anger their live tapestries;

				 				Free from cold, and every care,

				 				Of chilly rain, and shivering air.



			 				Zephyr

			 				Spright of Fire! away! away!

				 				Or your very roundelay

				 				Will sear my plumage newly budded

				 				From its quilled sheath, and studded

				 				With the self-same dews that fell

				 				On the May-grown Asphodel.

				 				Spright of Fire⁠—away! away!



			 				Breama

			 				Spright of Fire⁠—away! away!

				 				Zephyr, blue-eyed Faery, turn,

				 				And see my cool sedge-shaded urn,

				 				Where it rests its mossy brim

				 				’Mid water-mint and cresses dim;

				 				And the flowers, in sweet troubles,

				 				Lift their eyes above the bubbles,

				 				Like our Queen, when she would please

				 				To sleep, and Oberon will tease.

				 				Love me, blue-eyed Faery! true,

				 				Soothly I am sick for you.



			 				Zephyr

			 				Gentle Breama! by the first

				 				Violet young nature nurst,

				 				I will bathe myself with thee,

				 				So you sometime follow me

				 				To my home, far, far, in west,

				 				Far beyond the search and quest

				 				Of the golden-browed sun.

				 				Come with me, o’er tops of trees,

				 				To my fragrant palaces,

				 				Where they ever floating are

				 				Beneath the cherish of a star

				 				Call’d Vesper, who with silver veil

				 				Ever hides his brilliance pale,

				 				Ever gently-drowsed doth keep

				 				Twilight for the Fays to sleep.

				 				Fear not that your watery hair

				 				Will thirst in drouthy ringlets there;

				 				Clouds of stored summer rains

				 				Thou shalt taste, before the stains

				 				Of the mountain soil they take,

				 				And too unlucent for thee make.

				 				I love thee, crystal Faery, true!

				 				Sooth I am as sick for you!



			 				Salamander

			 				Out, ye aguish Faeries, out!

				 				Chilly lovers, what a rout

				 				Keep ye with your frozen breath,

				 				Colder than the mortal death.

				 				Adder-eyed Dusketha, speak,

				 				Shall we leave them, and go seek

				 				In the earth’s wide entrails old

				 				Couches warm as theirs is cold?

				 				O for a fiery gloom and thee,

				 				Dusketha, so enchantingly

				 				Freckle-wing’d and lizard-sided!



			 				Dusketha

			 				By thee, Spright, will I be guided!

				 				I care not for cold or heat;

				 				Frost and flame, or sparks, or sleet,

				 				To my essence are the same;⁠—

				 				But I honour more the flame.

				 				Spright of fire, I follow thee

				 				Wheresoever it may be;

				 				To the torrid spouts and fountains,

				 				Underneath earth-quaked mountains;

				 				Or, at thy supreme desire,

				 				Touch the very pulse of fire

				 				With my bare unlidded eyes.



			 				Salamander

			 				Sweet Dusketha! paradise!

				 				Off, ye icy Spirits, fly!

				 				Frosty creatures of the sky!



			 				Dusketha

			 				Breathe upon them, fiery Spright!



			Zephyr, Breama (to each other

)

			 				Away! away to our delight!



			 				Salamander

			 				Go, feed on icicles, while we

				 				Bedded in tongued flames will be.



			 				Dusketha

			 				Lead me to these fev’rous glooms,

				 				Spright of Fire!



			 				Breama

			 				Me to the blooms,

				 				Blue eyed Zephyr of those flowers

				 				Far in the west where the May-cloud lowers:

				 				And the beams of still Vesper, where winds are all whist,

				 				Are shed thro’ the rain and the milder mist,

				 				And twilight your floating bowers.





To Sleep


			 				O soft embalmer of the still midnight,

				 				Shutting, with careful fingers and benign,

				 				Our gloom-pleased eyes, embower’d from the light,

				 				Enshaded in forgetfulness divine:

				 				O soothest Sleep! if so it please thee, close,

				 				In midst of this thine hymn, my willing eyes,

				 				Or wait the amen, ere thy poppy throws

				 				Around my bed its dewy charities;

				 				Then save me, or the passed day will shine

				 				Upon my pillow, breeding many woes;

				 				Save me from curious conscience, that still lords

				 				Its strength for darkness, burrowing like a mole;

				 				Turn the key deftly in the oiled wards,

				 				And seal the hushed casket of my soul.





Another on Fame


			 				Fame, like a wayward girl, will still be coy

				 				To those who woo her with too slavish knees,

				 				But makes surrender to some thoughtless boy,

				 				And dotes the more upon a heart at ease;

				 				She is a Gipsy,⁠—will not speak to those

				 				Who have not learnt to be content without her;

				 				A Jilt, whose ear was never whisper’d close,

				 				Who thinks they scandal her who talk about her;

				 				A very Gipsy is she, Nilus-born,

				 				Sister-in-law to jealous Potiphar;

				 				Ye lovesick Bards! repay her scorn for scorn;

				 				Ye Artists lovelorn! madmen that ye are!

				 				Make your best bow to her and bid adieu,

				 				Then, if she likes it, she will follow you.





On Fame


				 					“You cannot eat your cake and have it too.”

					Proverb



				How fever’d is that man, who cannot look

				 				Upon his mortal days with temperate blood,

				 				Who vexes all the leaves of his life’s book,

				 				And robs his fair name of its maidenhood:

				 				It is as if the rose should pluck herself,

				 				Or the ripe plum finger its misty bloom;

				 				As if a Naiad, like a meddling elf,

				 				Should darken her pure grot with muddy gloom.

				 				But the rose leaves herself upon the brier,

				 				For winds to kiss and grateful bees to feed,

				 				And the ripe plum still wears its dim attire,

				 				The undisturbed lake has crystal space:

				 				Why then should man, teasing the world for grace,

				 				Spoil his salvation for a fierce miscreed?





Sonnet


			 				If by dull rhymes our English must be chain’d,

				 				And, like Andromeda, the Sonnet sweet

				 				Fetter’d, in spite of pained loveliness;

				 				Let us find out, if we must be constrain’d,

				 				Sandals more interwoven and complete

				 				To fit the naked foot of poesy;

				 				Let us inspect the lyre, and weigh the stress

				 				Of every chord, and see what may be gain’d

				 				By ear industrious, and attention meet;

				 				Misers of sound and syllable, no less

				 				Than Midas of his coinage, let us be

				 				Jealous of dead leaves in the bay-wreath crown:

				 				So, if we may not let the Muse be free,

				 				She will be bound with garlands of her own.





Ode to Psyche




I


				 					O Goddess! hear these tuneless numbers, wrung

					 					By sweet enforcement and remembrance dear,

					 					And pardon that thy secrets should be sung

					 					Even into thine own soft-conched ear:

					 					Surely I dreamt to-day, or did I see

					 					The winged Psyche with awaken’d eyes?

					 					I wander’d in a forest thoughtlessly,

					 					And, on the sudden, fainting with surprise,

					 					Saw two fair creatures, couched side by side

					 					In deepest grass, beneath the whisp’ring roof

					 					Of leaves and trembled blossoms, where there ran

					 					A brooklet, scarce espied:





II


				 					’Mid hush’d, cool-rooted flowers fragrant eyed,

					 					Blue, silver-white, and budded Tyrian,

					 					They lay calm-breathing on the bedded grass;

					 					Their arms embraced, and their pinions too;

					 					Their lips touch’d not, but had not bade adieu,

					 					As if disjoined by soft-handed slumber,

					 					And ready still past kisses to outnumber

					 					At tender eye-dawn of aurorean love:

					 					The winged boy I knew;

					 					But who wast thou, O happy, happy dove?

					 					His Psyche true!





III


				 					O latest-born and loveliest vision far

					 					Of all Olympus’ faded hierarchy!

					 					Fairer than Phœbe’s sapphire-region’d star,

					 					Or Vesper, amorous glow-worm of the sky;

					 					Fairer than these, though temple thou hast none,

					 					Nor altar heap’d with flowers;

					 					Nor virgin-choir to make delicious moan

					 					Upon the midnight hours;

					 					No voice, no lute, no pipe, no incense sweet

					 					From chain-swung censer teeming;

					 					No shrine, no grove, no oracle, no heat

					 					Of pale-mouth’d prophet dreaming.





IV


				 					O brightest! though too late for antique vows,

					 					Too, too late for the fond believing lyre,

					 					When holy were the haunted forest boughs,

					 					Holy the air, the water, and the fire;

					 					Yet even in these days so far retired

					 					From happy pieties, thy lucent fans,

					 					Fluttering among the faint Olympians,

					 					I see, and sing, by my own eyes inspired.

					 					So let me be thy choir, and make a moan

					 					Upon the midnight hours;

					 					Thy voice, thy lute, thy pipe, thy incense sweet

					 					From swinged censer teeming;

					 					Thy shrine, thy grove, thy oracle, thy heat

					 					Of pale-mouth’d prophet dreaming.





V


				 					Yes, I will be thy priest, and build a fane

					 					In some untrodden region of my mind,

					 					Where branched thoughts, new-grown with pleasant pain,

					 					Instead of pines shall murmur in the wind:

					 					Far, far around shall those dark-cluster’d trees

					 					Fledge the wild-ridged mountains steep by steep;

					 					And there by zephyrs, streams, and birds, and bees,

					 					The moss-lain Dryads shall be lulled to sleep,

					 					And in the midst of this wide quietness

					 					A rosy sanctuary will I dress

					 					With the wreath’d trellis of a working brain,

					 					With buds, and bells, and stars without a name,

					 					With all the gardener Fancy e’er could feign,

					 					Who breeding flowers, will never breed the same:

					 					And there shall be for thee all soft delight

					 					That shadowy thought can win,

					 					A bright torch, and a casement ope at night,

					 					To let the warm Love in!





Ode to a Nightingale




I


				 					My heart aches, and a drowsy numbness pains

					 					My sense, as though of hemlock I had drunk,

					 					Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains

					 					One minute past, and Lethe-wards had sunk:

					 					’Tis not through envy of thy happy lot,

					 					But being too happy in thine happiness,⁠—

					 					That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees,

					 					In some melodious plot

					 					Of beechen green, and shadows numberless,

					 					Singest of summer in full-throated ease.





II


				 					O for a draught of vintage! that hath been

					 					Cool’d a long age in the deep-delved earth,

					 					Tasting of Flora and the country-green,

					 					Dance, and Provençal song, and sunburnt mirth!

					 					O for a beaker full of the warm South,

					 					Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene,

					 					With beaded bubbles winking at the brim,

					 					And purple-stained mouth;

					 					That I might drink, and leave the world unseen,

					 					And with thee fade away into the forest dim:





III


				 					Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget

					 					What thou among the leaves hast never known,

					 					The weariness, the fever, and the fret

					 					Here, where men sit and hear each other groan;

					 					Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last gray hairs,

					 					Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin, and dies;

					 					Where but to think is to be full of sorrow

					 					And leaden-eyed despairs,

					 					Where Beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes,

					 					Or new Love pine at them beyond to-morrow.





IV


				 					Away! away! for I will fly to thee,

					 					Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards,

					 					But on the viewless wings of Poesy,

					 					Though the dull brain perplexes and retards:

					 					Already with thee! tender is the night,

					 					And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne,

					 					Cluster’d around by all her starry Fays;

					 					But here there is no light,

					 					Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown

					 					Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways.





V


				 					I cannot see what flowers are at my feet,

					 					Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs,

					 					But, in embalmed darkness, guess each sweet

					 					Wherewith the seasonable month endows

					 					The grass, the thicket, and the fruit-tree wild;

					 					White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine;

					 					Fast fading violets cover’d up in leaves;

					 					And mid-May’s eldest child,

					 					The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine,

					 					The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves.





VI


				 					Darkling I listen; and, for many a time

					 					I have been half in love with easeful Death,

					 					Call’d him soft names in many a mused rhyme,

					 					To take into the air my quiet breath;

					 					Now more than ever seems it rich to die,

					 					To cease upon the midnight with no pain,

					 					While thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad

					 					In such an ecstacy!

					 					Still wouldst thou sing, and I have ears in vain⁠—

					 					To thy high requiem become a sod.





VII


				 					Thou wast not born for death, immortal Bird!

					 					No hungry generations tread thee down;

					 					The voice I hear this passing night was heard

					 					In ancient days by emperor and clown:

					 					Perhaps the self-same song that found a path

					 					Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home,

					 					She stood in tears amid the alien corn;

					 					The same that oft-times hath

					 					Charm’d magic casements, opening on the foam

					 					Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn.





VIII


				 					Forlorn! the very word is like a bell

					 					To toll me back from thee to my sole self!

					 					Adieu! the fancy cannot cheat so well

					 					As she is famed to do, deceiving elf.

					 					Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades

					 					Past the near meadows, over the still stream,

					 					Up the hill-side; and now ’tis buried deep

					 					In the next valley-glades:

					 					Was it a vision, or a waking dream?

					 					Fled is that music:⁠—do I wake or sleep?





Lamia




I


				 					Upon a time, before the faery broods

					 					Drove Nymph and Satyr from the prosperous woods,

					 					Before King Oberon’s bright diadem,

					 					Sceptre, and mantle, clasp’d with dewy gem,

					 					Frighted away the Dryads and the Fauns

					 					From rushes green, and brakes, and cowslipp’d lawns,

					 					The ever-smitten Hermes empty left

					 					His golden throne, bent warm on amorous theft;

					 					From high Olympus had he stolen light,

					 					On this side of Jove’s clouds, to escape the sight

					 					Of his great summer, and made retreat

					 					Into a forest on the shores of Crete.

					 					For somewhere in that sacred island dwelt

					 					A nymph, to whom all hoofed Satyrs knelt;

					 					At whose white feet the languid Tritons poured

					 					Pearls, while on land they wither’d and adored.

					 					Fast by the springs where she to bathe was wont,

					 					And in those meads where sometimes she might haunt,

					 					Were strewn rich gifts, unknown to any Muse,

					 					Though Fancy’s casket were unlock’d to choose.

					 					Ah, what a world of love was at her feet!

					 					So Hermes thought, and a celestial heat

					 					Burnt from his winged heels to either ear,

					 					That from a whiteness, as the lily clear,

					 					Blush’d into roses ’mid his golden hair,

					 					Fallen in jealous curls about his shoulders bare.



				 					From vale to vale, from wood to wood, he flew,

					 					Breathing upon the flowers his passion new,

					 					And wound with many a river to its head,

					 					To find where this sweet nymph prepared her secret bed:

					 					In vain; the sweet nymph might nowhere be found,

					 					And so he rested, on the lonely ground,

					 					Pensive, and full of painful jealousies

					 					Of the Wood Gods, and even the very trees.

					 					There as he stood, he heard a mournful voice,

					 					Such as once heard, in gentle heart, destroys

					 					All pain but pity: thus the lone voice spake:

					 					“When from this wreathed tomb shall I awake!

					 					When move in a sweet body fit for life,

					 					And love, and pleasure, and the ruddy strife

					 					Of hearts and lips! Ah, miserable me!”

					 					The God, dove-footed, glided silently

					 					Round bush and tree, soft-brushing, in his speed,

					 					The taller grasses and full-flowering weed,

					 					Until he found a palpitating snake,

					 					Bright, and cirque-couchant in a dusky brake.



				 					She was a gordian shape of dazzling hue,

					 					Vermilion-spotted, golden, green, and blue;

					 					Striped like a zebra, freckled like a pard,

					 					Eyed like a peacock, and all crimson barr’d;

					 					And full of silver moons, that, as she breathed,

					 					Dissolved, or brighter shone, or interwreathed

					 					Their lustres with the gloomier tapestries⁠—

					 					So rainbow-sided, touch’d with miseries,

					 					She seem’d, at once, some penanced lady elf,

					 					Some demon’s mistress, or the demon’s self.

					 					Upon her crest she wore a wannish fire

					 					Sprinkled with stars, like Ariadne’s tiar:

					 					Her head was serpent, but ah, bitter-sweet!

					 					She had a woman’s mouth with all its pearls complete:

					 					And for her eyes⁠—what could such eyes do there

					 					But weep, and weep, that they were born so fair?

					 					As Proserpine still weeps for her Sicilian air.

					 					Her throat was serpent, but the words she spake

					 					Came, as through bubbling honey, for Love’s sake,

					 					And thus; while Hermes on his pinions lay,

					 					Like a stoop’d falcon ere he takes his prey:



				 					“Fair Hermes! crown’d with feathers, fluttering light,

					 					I had a splendid dream of thee last night:

					 					I saw thee sitting, on a throne of gold,

					 					Among the Gods, upon Olympus old,

					 					The only sad one; for thou didst not hear

					 					The soft, lute-finger’d Muses chanting clear,

					 					Nor even Apollo when he sang alone,

					 					Deaf to his throbbing throat’s long, long melodious moan.

					 					I dreamt I saw thee, robed in purple flakes,

					 					Break amorous through the clouds, as morning breaks,

					 					And, swiftly as a bright Phœbean dart,

					 					Strike for the Cretan isle; and here thou art!

					 					Too gentle Hermes, hast thou found the maid?”

					 					Whereat the star of Lethe not delay’d

					 					His rosy eloquence, and thus inquired:

					 					“Thou smooth-lipp’d serpent, surely high-inspired!

					 					Thou beauteous wreath, with melancholy eyes,

					 					Possess whatever bliss thou canst devise,

					 					Telling me only where my nymph is fled,⁠—

					 					Where she doth breathe!” “Bright planet, thou hast said,”

					 					Return’d the snake, “but seal with oaths, fair God!”

					 					“I swear,” said Hermes, “by my serpent rod,

					 					And by thine eyes, and by thy starry crown!

					 					Light flew his earnest words, among the blossoms blown.

					 					Then thus again the brilliance feminine:

					 					“Too frail of heart! for this lost nymph of thine,

					 					Free as the air, invisibly, she strays

					 					About these thornless wilds; her pleasant days

					 					She tastes unseen; unseen her nimble feet

					 					Leave traces in the grass and flowers sweet;

					 					From weary tendrils, and bow’d branches green,

					 					She plucks the fruit unseen, she bathes unseen:

					 					And by my power is her beauty veil’d

					 					To keep it unaffronted, unassail’d

					 					By the love-glances of unlovely eyes,

					 					Of Satyrs, Fauns, and blear’d Silenus’ sighs.

					 					Pale grew her immortality, for woe

					 					Of all these lovers, and she grieved so

					 					I took compassion on her, bade her steep

					 					Her hair in weïrd syrops, that would keep

					 					Her loveliness invisible, yet free

					 					To wander as she loves, in liberty.

					 					Thou shalt behold her, Hermes, thou alone,

					 					If thou wilt, as thou swearest, grant my boon!”

					 					Then, once again, the charmed God began

					 					An oath, and through the serpent’s ears it ran

					 					Warm, tremulous, devout, psalterian.

					 					Ravish’d she lifted her Circean head,

					 					Blush’d a live damask, and swift-lisping said,

					 					“I was a woman, let me have once more

					 					A woman’s shape, and charming as before.

					 					I love a youth of Corinth⁠—O the bliss!

					 					Give me my woman’s form, and place me where he is.

					 					Stoop, Hermes, let me breathe upon thy brow,

					 					And thou shalt see thy sweet nymph even now.”

					 					The God on half-shut feathers sank serene,

					 					She breathed upon his eyes, and swift was seen

					 					Of both the guarded nymph near-smiling on the green.

					 					It was no dream; or say a dream it was,

					 					Real are the dreams of Gods, and smoothly pass

					 					Their pleasures in a long immortal dream.

					 					One warm, flush’d moment, hovering, it might seem

					 					Dash’d by the wood-nymph’s beauty, so he burn’d;

					 					Then, lighting on the printless verdure, turn’d

					 					To the swoon’d serpent, and with languid arm,

					 					Delicate, put to proof the lithe Caducean charm.

					 					So done, upon the nymph his eyes he bent

					 					Full of adoring tears and blandishment,

					 					And towards her stept: she, like a moon in wane,

					 					Faded before him, cower’d, nor could restrain

					 					Her fearful sobs, self-folding like a flower

					 					That faints into itself at evening hour:

					 					But the God fostering her chilled hand,

					 					She felt the warmth, her eyelids open’d bland,

					 					And, like new flowers at morning song of bees,

					 					Bloom’d, and gave up her honey to the lees.

					 					Into the green-recessed woods they flew;

					 					Nor grew they pale, as mortal lovers do.



				 					Left to herself, the serpent now began

					 					To change; her elfin blood in madness ran,

					 					Her mouth foam’d, and the grass, therewith besprent,

					 					Wither’d at dew so sweet and virulent;

					 					Her eyes in torture fix’d, and anguish drear,

					 					Hot, glazed, and wide, with lid-lashes all sear,

					 					Flash’d phosphor and sharp sparks, without one cooling tear.

					 					The colours all inflamed throughout her train,

					 					She writhed about, convulsed with scarlet pain:

					 					A deep volcanian yellow took the place

					 					Of all her milder-mooned body’s grace;

					 					And, as the lava ravishes the mead,

					 					Spoilt all her silver mail, and golden brede:

					 					Made gloom of all her frecklings, streaks and bars,

					 					Eclipsed her crescents, and lick’d up her stars:

					 					So that, in moments few, she was undrest

					 					Of all her sapphires, greens, and amethyst,

					 					And rubious-argent: of all these bereft,

					 					Nothing but pain and ugliness were left.

					 					Still shone her crown; that vanish’d, also she

					 					Melted and disappear’d as suddenly;

					 					And in the air, her new voice luting soft,

					 					Cried, “Lycius! gentle Lycius!”⁠—Borne aloft

					 					With the bright mists about the mountains hoar

					 					These words dissolved: Crete’s forests heard no more.



				 					Whither fled Lamia, now a lady bright,

					 					A full-born beauty new and exquisite?

					 					She fled into that valley they pass o’er

					 					Who go to Corinth from Cenchreas’ shore;

					 					And rested at the foot of those wild hills,

					 					The rugged founts of the Peræan rills,

					 					And of that other ridge whose barren back

					 					Stretches, with all its mist and cloudy rack,

					 					South-westward to Cleone. There she stood

					 					About a young bird’s flutter from a wood,

					 					Fair, on a sloping green of mossy tread,

					 					By a clear pool, wherein she passioned

					 					To see herself escaped from so sore ills,

					 					While her robes flaunted with the daffodils.



				 					Ah, happy Lycius!⁠—for she was a maid

					 					More beautiful than ever twisted braid,

					 					Or sigh’d, or blush’d, or on spring-flowered lea

					 					Spread a green kirtle to the minstrelsy:

					 					A virgin purest lipp’d, yet in the lore

					 					Of love deep learned to the red heart’s core:

					 					Not one hour old, yet of sciential brain

					 					To unperplex bliss from its neighbour pain;

					 					Define their pettish limits, and estrange

					 					Their points of contact, and swift counterchange;

					 					Intrigue with the specious chaos, and dispart

					 					Its most ambiguous atoms with sure art;

					 					As though in Cupid’s college she had spent

					 					Sweet days a lovely graduate, still unshent,

					 					And kept his rosy terms in idle languishment.



				 					Why this fair creature chose so fairily

					 					By the wayside to linger, we shall see;

					 					But first ’tis fit to tell how she could muse

					 					And dream, when in the serpent prison-house,

					 					Of all she list, strange or magnificent:

					 					How, ever, where she will’d, her spirit went;

					 					Whether to faint Elysium, or where

					 					Down through tress-lifting waves the Nereids fair

					 					Wind into Thetis’ bower by many a pearly stair;

					 					Or where God Bacchus drains his cups divine,

					 					Stretch’d out, at ease, beneath a glutinous pine;

					 					Or where in Pluto’s gardens palatine

					 					Mulciber’s columns gleam in far piazzian line.

					 					And sometimes into cities she would send

					 					Her dream, with feast and rioting to blend;

					 					And once, while among mortals dreaming thus,

					 					She saw the young Corinthian Lycius

					 					Charioting foremost in the envious race,

					 					Like a young Jove with calm uneager face,

					 					And fell into a swooning love of him.

					 					Now on the moth-time of that evening dim

					 					He would return that way, as well she knew,

					 					To Corinth from the shore; for freshly blew

					 					The eastern soft wind, and his galley now

					 					Grated the quay-stones with her brazen prow

					 					In port Cenchreas, from Egina isle

					 					Fresh anchor’d; whither he had been awhile

					 					To sacrifice to Jove, whose temple there

					 					Waits with high marble doors for blood and incense rare.

					 					Jove heard his vows, and better’d his desire;

					 					For by some freakful chance he made retire

					 					From his companions, and set forth to walk,

					 					Perhaps grown wearied of their Corinth talk:

					 					Over the solitary hills he fared,

					 					Thoughtless at first, but ere eve’s star appear’d

					 					His phantasy was lost, where reason fades,

					 					In the calm’d twilight of Platonic shades.

					 					Lamia beheld him coming, near, more near⁠—

					 					Close to her passing, in indifference drear,

					 					His silent sandals swept the mossy green;

					 					So neighbour’d to him, and yet so unseen

					 					She stood: he pass’d, shut up in mysteries,

					 					His mind wrapp’d like his mantle, while her eyes

					 					Follow’d his steps, and her neck regal white

					 					Turn’d⁠—syllabling thus, “Ah, Lycius bright!

					 					And will you leave me on the hills alone?

					 					Lycius, look back! and be some pity shown.”

					 					He did; not with cold wonder fearingly,

					 					But Orpheus-like at an Eurydice;

					 					For so delicious were the words she sung,

					 					It seem’d he had loved them a whole summer long:

					 					And soon his eyes had drunk her beauty up,

					 					Leaving no drop in the bewildering cup,

					 					And still the cup was full,⁠—while he, afraid

					 					Lest she should vanish ere his lips had paid

					 					Due adoration, thus began to adore;

					 					Her soft look growing coy, she saw his chain so sure:

					 					“Leave thee alone! Look back! Ah, Goddess, see

					 					Whether my eyes can ever turn from thee!

					 					For pity do not this sad heart belie⁠—

					 					Even as thou vanishest so I shall die.

					 					Stay! though a Naiad of the rivers, stay!

					 					To thy far wishes will thy streams obey:

					 					Stay! though the greenest woods be thy domain,

					 					Alone they can drink up the morning rain:

					 					Though a descended Pleiad, will not one

					 					Of thine harmonious sisters keep in tune

					 					Thy spheres, and as thy silver proxy shine?

					 					So sweetly to these ravish’d ears of mine

					 					Came thy sweet greeting, that if thou shouldst fade,

					 					Thy memory will waste me to a shade:⁠—

					 					For pity do not melt!”⁠—“If I should stay,”

					 					Said Lamia, “here, upon this floor of clay,

					 					And pain my steps upon these flowers too rough,

					 					What canst thou say or do of charm enough

					 					To dull the nice remembrance of my home?

					 					Thou canst not ask me with thee here to roam

					 					Over these hills and vales, where no joy is,⁠—

					 					Empty of immortality and bliss!

					 					Thou art a scholar, Lycius, and must know

					 					That finer spirits cannot breathe below

					 					In human climes, and live: Alas! poor youth,

					 					What taste of purer air hast thou to soothe

					 					My essence? What serener palaces,

					 					Where I may all my many senses please,

					 					And by mysterious sleights a hundred thirsts appease?

					 					It cannot be⁠—Adieu!” So said, she rose

					 					Tiptoe with white arms spread. He, sick to lose

					 					The amorous promise of her lone complain,

					 					Swoon’d murmuring of love, and pale with pain.

					 					The cruel lady, without any show

					 					Of sorrow for her tender favourite’s woe,

					 					But rather, if her eyes could brighter be,

					 					With brighter eyes and slow amenity,

					 					Put her new lips to his, and gave afresh

					 					The life she had so tangled in her mesh:

					 					And as he from one trance was weakening

					 					Into another, she began to sing,

					 					Happy in beauty, life, and love, and every thing,

					 					A song of love, too sweet for earthly lyres,

					 					While, like held breath, the stars drew in their panting fires.

					 					And then she whisper’d in such trembling tone,

					 					As those who, safe together met alone

					 					For the first time through many anguish’d days,

					 					Use other speech than looks; bidding him raise

					 					His drooping head, and clear his soul of doubt,

					 					For that she was a woman, and without

					 					Any more subtle fluid in her veins

					 					Than throbbing blood, and that the self-same pains

					 					Inhabited her frail-strung heart as his.

					 					And next she wonder’d how his eyes could miss

					 					Her face so long in Corinth, where, she said,

					 					She dwelt but half retired, and there had led

					 					Days happy as the gold coin could invent

					 					Without the aid of love; yet in content

					 					Till she saw him, as once she pass’d him by,

					 					Where ’gainst a column he leant thoughtfully

					 					At Venus’ temple porch, ’mid baskets heap’d

					 					Of amorous herbs and flowers, newly reap’d

					 					Late on that eve, as ’twas the night before

					 					The Adonian feast; whereof she saw no more,

					 					But wept alone those days, for why should she adore?

					 					Lycius from death awoke into amaze,

					 					To see her still, and singing so sweet lays;

					 					Then from amaze into delight he fell

					 					To hear her whisper woman’s lore so well;

					 					And every word she spake enticed him on

					 					To unperplex’d delight and pleasure known.

					 					Let the mad poets say whate’er they please

					 					Of the sweets of Fairies, Peris, Goddesses,

					 					There is not such a treat among them all,

					 					Haunters of cavern, lake, and waterfall,

					 					As a real woman, lineal indeed

					 					From Pyrrha’s pebbles or old Adam’s seed.

					 					Thus gentle Lamia judged, and judged aright,

					 					That Lycius could not love in half a fright,

					 					So threw the goddess off, and won his heart

					 					More pleasantly by playing woman’s part,

					 					With no more awe than what her beauty gave,

					 					That, while it smote, still guaranteed to save.

					 					Lycius to all made eloquent reply,

					 					Marrying to every word a twin-born sigh:

					 					And last, pointing to Corinth, ask’d her sweet,

					 					If ’twas too far that night for her soft feet.

					 					The way was short, for Lamia’s eagerness

					 					Made, by a spell, the triple league decrease

					 					To a few paces; not at all surmised

					 					By blinded Lycius, so in her comprised:

					 					They pass’d the city gates, he knew not how,

					 					So noiseless, and he never thought to know.



				 					As men talk in a dream, so Corinth all,

					 					Throughout her palaces imperial,

					 					And all her populous streets and temples lewd,

					 					Mutter’d, like tempest in the distance brew’d,

					 					To the wide-spreaded night above her towers.

					 					Men, women, rich and poor, in the cool hours,

					 					Shuffled their sandals o’er the pavement white,

					 					Companion’d or alone; while many a light

					 					Flared, here and there, from wealthy festivals,

					 					And threw their moving shadows on the walls,

					 					Or found them cluster’d in the corniced shade

					 					Of some arch’d temple door, or dusky colonnade.



				 					Muffling his face, of greeting friends in fear,

					 					Her fingers he press’d hard, as one came near

					 					With curl’d gray beard, sharp eyes, and smooth bald crown,

					 					Slow-stepp’d, and robed in philosophic gown:

					 					Lycius shrank closer, as they met and past,

					 					Into his mantle, adding wings to haste,

					 					While hurried Lamia trembled: “Ah,” said he,

					 					“Why do you shudder, love, so ruefully?

					 					Why does your tender palm dissolve in dew?”⁠—

					 					“I’m wearied,” said fair Lamia: “tell me who

					 					Is that old man? I cannot bring to mind

					 					His features:⁠—Lycius! wherefore did you blind

					 					Yourself from his quick eyes?” Lycius replied,

					 					“ ’Tis Apollonius sage, my trusty guide

					 					And good instructor; but to-night he seems

					 					The ghost of folly haunting my sweet dreams.”



				 					While yet he spake they had arrived before

					 					A pillar’d porch, with lofty portal door,

					 					Where hung a silver lamp, whose phosphor glow

					 					Reflected in the slabbed steps below,

					 					Mild as a star in water; for so new

					 					And so unsullied was the marble hue,

					 					So through the crystal polish, liquid fine,

					 					Ran the dark veins, that none but feet divine

					 					Could e’er have touch’d there. Sounds Æolian

					 					Breathed from the hinges, as the ample span

					 					Of the wide doors disclosed a place unknown

					 					Some time to any, but those two alone,

					 					And a few Persian mutes, who that same year

					 					Were seen about the markets: none knew where

					 					They could inhabit; the most curious

					 					Were foil’d, who watch’d to trace them to their house:

					 					And but the flitter-winged verse must tell,

					 					For truth’s sake, what woe afterwards befell,

					 					’Twould humour many a heart to leave them thus,

					 					Shut from the busy world of more incredulous.





II


				 					Love in a hut, with water and a crust,

					 					Is⁠—Love, forgive us!⁠—cinders, ashes, dust;

					 					Love in a palace is perhaps at last

					 					More grievous torment than a hermit’s fast:⁠—

					 					That is a doubtful tale from faery land,

					 					Hard for the non-elect to understand.

					 					Had Lycius lived to hand his story down,

					 					He might have given the moral a fresh frown,

					 					Or clench’d it quite: but too short was their bliss

					 					To breed distrust and hate, that make the soft voice hiss.

					 					Besides, there, nightly, with terrific glare,

					 					Love, jealous grown of so complete a pair

					 					Hover’d and buzz’d his wings, with fearful roar,

					 					Above the lintel of their chamber door,

					 					And down the passage cast a glow upon the floor.



				 					For all this came a ruin: side by side

					 					They were enthroned, in the even tide,

					 					Upon a couch, near to a curtaining

					 					Whose airy texture, from a golden string,

					 					Floated into the room, and let appear

					 					Unveil’d the summer heaven, blue and clear,

					 					Betwixt two marble shafts:⁠—there they reposed,

					 					Where use had made it sweet, with eyelids closed,

					 					Saving a tithe which love still open kept,

					 					That they might see each other while they almost slept;

					 					When from the slope side of a suburb hill,

					 					Deafening the swallow’s twitter, came a thrill

					 					Of trumpets⁠—Lycius started⁠—the sounds fled,

					 					But left a thought, a buzzing in his head.

					 					For the first time, since first he harbour’d in

					 					That purple-lined palace of sweet sin,

					 					His spirit pass’d beyond its golden bourn

					 					Into the noisy world almost forsworn.

					 					The lady, ever watchful, penetrant,

					 					Saw this with pain, so arguing a want

					 					Of something more, more than her empery

					 					Of joys; and she began to moan and sigh

					 					Because he mused beyond her, knowing well

					 					That but a moment’s thought is passion’s passing bell.

					 					“Why do you sigh, fair creature?” whisper’d he:

					 					“Why do you think?” return’d she tenderly:

					 					“You have deserted me;⁠—where am I now?

					 					Not in your heart while care weighs on your brow:

					 					No, no, you have dismiss’d me; and I go

					 					From your breast houseless: aye, it must be so.”

					 					He answer’d, bending to her open eyes,

					 					Where he was mirror’d small in paradise,

					 					“My silver planet, both of eve and morn!

					 					Why will you plead yourself so sad forlorn,

					 					While I am striving how to fill my heart

					 					With deeper crimson, and a double smart?

					 					How to entangle, trammel up and snare

					 					Your soul in mine, and labyrinth you there,

					 					Like the hid scent in an unbudded rose?

					 					Aye, a sweet kiss⁠—you see your mighty woes.

					 					My thoughts! shall I unveil them? Listen then!

					 					What mortal hath a prize, that other men

					 					May be confounded and abash’d withal,

					 					But lets it sometimes pace abroad majestical,

					 					And triumph, as in thee I should rejoice

					 					Amid the hoarse alarm of Corinth’s voice.

					 					Let my foes choke, and my friends shout afar,

					 					While through the thronged streets your bridal car

					 					Wheels round its dazzling spokes.”⁠—The lady’s cheek

					 					Trembled; she nothing said, but, pale and meek,

					 					Arose and knelt before him, wept a rain

					 					Of sorrows at his words; at last with pain

					 					Beseeching him, the while his hand she wrung,

					 					To change his purpose. He thereat was stung,

					 					Perverse, with stronger fancy to reclaim

					 					Her wild and timid nature to his aim;

					 					Besides, for all his love, in self despite,

					 					Against his better self, he took delight

					 					Luxurious in her sorrows, soft and new.

					 					His passion, cruel grown, took on a hue

					 					Fierce and sanguineous as ’twas possible

					 					In one whose brow had no dark veins to swell.

					 					Fine was the mitigated fury, like

					 					Apollo’s presence when in act to strike

					 					The serpent⁠—Ha! the serpent! certes, she

					 					Was none. She burnt, she loved the tyranny,

					 					And, all subdued, consented to the hour

					 					When to the bridal he should lead his paramour.

					 					Whispering in midnight silence, said the youth,

					 					“Sure some sweet name thou hast, though, by my truth,

					 					I have not ask’d it, ever thinking thee

					 					Not mortal, but of heavenly progeny,

					 					As still I do. Hast any mortal name,

					 					Fit appellation for this dazzling frame?

					 					Or friends or kinsfolk on the citied earth,

					 					To share our marriage feast and nuptial mirth?”

					 					“I have no friends,” said Lamia, “no, not one;

					 					My presence in wide Corinth hardly known:

					 					My parents’ bones are in their dusty urns

					 					Sepulchred, where no kindled incense burns,

					 					Seeing all their luckless race are dead, save me,

					 					And I neglect the holy rite for thee.

					 					Even as you list invite your many guests;

					 					But if, as now it seems, your vision rests

					 					With any pleasure on me, do not bid

					 					Old Apollonius⁠—from him keep me hid.”

					 					Lycius, perplex’d at words so blind and blank,

					 					Made close inquiry; from whose touch she shrank,

					 					Feigning a sleep; and he to the dull shade

					 					Of deep sleep in a moment was betray’d.



				 					It was the custom then to bring away

					 					The bride from home at blushing shut of day,

					 					Veil’d, in a chariot, heralded along

					 					By strewn flowers, torches, and a marriage song,

					 					With other pageants: but this fair unknown

					 					Had not a friend. So being left alone,

					 					(Lycius was gone to summon all his kin,)

					 					And knowing surely she could never win

					 					His foolish heart from its mad pompousness,

					 					She set herself, high-thoughted, how to dress

					 					The misery in fit magnificence.

					 					She did so, but ’tis doubtful how and whence

					 					Came, and who were her subtle servitors.

					 					About the halls, and to and from the doors,

					 					There was a noise of wings, till in short space

					 					The glowing banquet-room shone with wide-arched grace.

					 					A haunting music, sole perhaps and lone

					 					Supportress of the faery-roof, made moan

					 					Throughout, as fearful the whole charm might fade.

					 					Fresh carved cedar, mimicking a glade

					 					Of palm and plantain, met from either side,

					 					High in the midst, in honour of the bride:

					 					Two palms and then two plantains, and so on,

					 					From either side their stems branch’d one to one

					 					All down the aisled place; and beneath all

					 					There ran a stream of lamps straight on from wall to wall.

					 					So canopied, lay an untasted feast

					 					Teeming with odours. Lamia, regal drest,

					 					Silently paced about, and as she went,

					 					In pale contented sort of discontent,

					 					Mission’d her viewless servants to enrich

					 					The fretted splendour of each nook and niche.

					 					Between the tree-stems, marbled plain at first,

					 					Came jasper panels; then, anon, there burst

					 					Forth creeping imagery of slighter trees,

					 					And with the larger wove in small intricacies.

					 					Approving all, she faded at self-will,

					 					And shut the chamber up, close, hush’d and still,

					 					Complete and ready for the revels rude,

					 					When dreadful guests would come to spoil her solitude.



				 					The day appear’d, and all the gossip rout.

					 					O senseless Lycius! Madman! wherefore flout

					 					The silent-blessing fate, warm cloister’d hours,

					 					And show to common eyes these secret bowers?

					 					The herd approach’d; each guest, with busy brain,

					 					Arriving at the portal, gazed amain,

					 					And enter’d marvelling: for they knew the street,

					 					Remember’d it from childhood all complete

					 					Without a gap, yet ne’er before had seen

					 					That royal porch, that high-built fair demesne;

					 					So in they hurried all, mazed, curious and keen:

					 					Save one, who look’d thereon with eye severe,

					 					And with calm-planted steps walk’d in austere:

					 					’Twas Apollonius: something too he laugh’d,

					 					As though some knotty problem, that had daft

					 					His patient thought, had now begun to thaw,

					 					And solve and melt:⁠—’twas just as he foresaw.



				 					He met within the murmurous vestibule

					 					His young disciple. “ ’Tis no common rule,

					 					Lycius,” said he, “for uninvited guest

					 					To force himself upon you, and infest

					 					With an unbiddden presence the bright throng

					 					Of younger friends; yet must I do this wrong,

					 					And you forgive me.” Lycius blush’d, and led

					 					The old man through the inner doors broadspread;

					 					With reconciling words and courteous mien

					 					Turning into sweet milk the sophist’s spleen.



				 					Of wealthy lustre was the banquet-room,

					 					Fill’d with pervading brilliance and perfume:

					 					Before each lucid panel fuming stood

					 					A censer fed with myrrh and spiced wood,

					 					Each by a sacred tripod held aloft,

					 					Whose slender feet wide-swerved upon the soft

					 					Wool-woofed carpets: fifty wreaths of smoke

					 					From fifty censers their light voyage took

					 					To the high roof, still mimick’d as they rose

					 					Along the mirror’d walls by twin-clouds odorous.

					 					Twelve sphered tables, by silk seats inspher’d,

					 					High as the level of a man’s breast rear’d

					 					On libbard’s paws, upheld the heavy gold

					 					Of cups and goblets, and the store thrice told

					 					Of Ceres’ horn, and, in huge vessels, wine

					 					Came from the gloomy tun with merry shine.

					 					Thus loaded with a feast the tables stood,

					 					Each shrining in the midst the image of a God.



				 					When in an antechamber every guest

					 					Had felt the cold full sponge to pleasure press’d,

					 					By ministering slaves, upon his hands and feet,

					 					And fragrant oils with ceremony meet

					 					Pour’d on his hair, they all moved to the feast

					 					In white robes, and themselves in order placed

					 					Around the silken couches, wondering

					 					Whence all this mighty cost and blaze of wealth could spring.



				 					Soft went the music the soft air along,

					 					While fluent Greek a vowel’d under-song

					 					Kept up among the guests, discoursing low

					 					At first, for scarcely was the wine at flow;

					 					But when the happy vintage touch’d their brains,

					 					Louder they talk, and louder come the strains

					 					Of powerful instruments:⁠—the gorgeous dyes,

					 					The space, the splendour of the draperies,

					 					The roof of awful richness, nectarous cheer,

					 					Beautiful slaves, and Lamia’s self, appear,

					 					Now, when the wine has done its rosy deed,

					 					And every soul from human trammels freed,

					 					No more so strange; for merry wine, sweet wine,

					 					Will make Elysian shades not too fair, too divine.

					 					Soon was God Bacchus at meridian height;

					 					Flush’d were their cheeks, and bright eyes double bright:

					 					Garlands of every green, and every scent

					 					From vales deflower’d, or forest-trees branch-rent,

					 					In baskets of bright osier’d gold were brought

					 					High as the handles heap’d, to suit the thought

					 					Of every guest: that each, as he did please,

					 					Might fancy-fit his brows, silk-pillow’d at his ease.



				 					What wreath for Lamia? What for Lycius?

					 					What for the sage, old Apollonius?

					 					Upon her aching forehead be there hung

					 					The leaves of willow and of adder’s tongue;

					 					And for the youth, quick, let us strip for him

					 					The thyrsus, that his watching eyes may swim

					 					Into forgetfulness; and, for the sage,

					 					Let spear-grass and the spiteful thistle wage

					 					War on his temples. Do not all charms fly

					 					At the mere touch of cold philosophy?

					 					There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:

					 					We know her woof, her texture; she is given

					 					In the dull catalogue of common things.

					 					Philosophy will clip an Angel’s wings,

					 					Conquer all mysteries by rule and line,

					 					Empty the haunted air, and gnomed mine⁠—

					 					Unweave a rainbow, as it erewhile made

					 					The tender-person’d Lamia melt into a shade.



				 					By her glad Lycius sitting, in chief place,

					 					Scarce saw in all the room another face,

					 					Till, checking his love trance, a cup he took

					 					Full brimm’d, and opposite sent forth a look

					 					’Cross the broad table, to beseech a glance

					 					From his old teacher’s wrinkled countenance,

					 					And pledge him. The bald-head philosopher

					 					Had fix’d his eye, without a twinkle or stir,

					 					Full on the alarmed beauty of the bride,

					 					Brow-beating her fair form, and troubling her sweet pride.

					 					Lycius then press’d her hand, with devout touch,

					 					As pale it lay upon the rosy couch:

					 					’Twas icy, and the cold ran through his veins;

					 					Then sudden it grew hot, and all the pains

					 					Of an unnatural heat shot to his heart.

					 					“Lamia, what means this? Wherefore dost thou start?

					 					Know’st thou that man?” Poor Lamia answer’d not.

					 					He gazed into her eyes, and not a jot

					 					Own’d they the lovelorn piteous appeal:

					 					More, more he gazed: his human senses reel:

					 					Some hungry spell that loveliness absorbs;

					 					There was no recognition in those orbs:

					 					“Lamia!” he cried⁠—and no soft-toned reply.

					 					The many heard, and the loud revelry

					 					Grew hush: the stately music no more breathes;

					 					The myrtle sicken’d in a thousand wreaths.

					 					By faint degrees, voice, lute, and pleasure ceased

					 					A deadly silence step by step increased,

					 					Until it seem’d a horrid presence there,

					 					And not a man but felt the terror in his hair.

					 					“Lamia!” he shriek’d; and nothing but the shriek

					 					With its sad echo did the silence break.

					 					“Begone, foul dream!” he cried, gazing again

					 					In the bride’s face, where now no azure vein

					 					Wander’d on fair-spaced temples; no soft bloom

					 					Misted the cheek; no passion to illume

					 					The deep-recessed vision:⁠—all was blight;

					 					Lamia, no longer fair, there sat a deadly white.

					 					“Shut, shut those juggling eyes, thou ruthless man!

					 					Turn them aside, wretch! or the righteous ban

					 					Of all the Gods, whose dreadful images

					 					Here represent their shadowy presences,

					 					May pierce them on the sudden with the thorn

					 					Of painful blindness; leaving thee forlorn,

					 					In trembling dotage to the feeblest fright

					 					Of conscience, for their long-offended might,

					 					For all thine impious proud-heart sophistries,

					 					Unlawful magic, and enticing lies.

					 					Corinthians! look upon that gray-beard wretch!

					 					Mark how, possess’d, his lashless eyelids stretch

					 					Around his demon eyes! Corinthians, see!

					 					My sweet bride withers at their potency.”

					 					“Fool!” said the sophist, in an under-tone

					 					Gruff with contempt; which a death-nighing moan

					 					From Lycius answer’d, as heart-struck and lost,

					 					He sank supine beside the aching ghost.

					 					“Fool! Fool!” repeated he, while his eyes still

					 					Relented not, nor moved; “from every ill

					 					Of life have I preserved thee to this day,

					 					And shall I see thee made a serpent’s prey?”

					 					Then Lamia breathed death breath; the sophist’s eye,

					 					Like a sharp spear, went through her utterly,

					 					Keen, cruel, perceant, stinging: she, as well

					 					As her weak hand could any meaning tell,

					 					Motion’d him to be silent; vainly so,

					 					He look’d and look’d again a level⁠—No!

					 					“A serpent!” echoed he; no sooner said,

					 					Than with a frightful scream she vanished:

					 					And Lycius’ arms were empty of delight,

					 					As were his limbs of life, from that same night.

					 					On the high couch he lay!⁠—his friends came round⁠—

					 					Supported him⁠—no pulse or breath they found,

					 					And, in its marriage robe, the heavy body wound.





A Party of Lovers


			 				Pensive they sit, and roll their languid eyes,

				 				Nibble their toast, and cool their tea with sighs,

				 				Or else forget the purpose of the night,

				 				Forget their tea⁠—forget their appetite.

				 				See with cross’d arms they sit⁠—ah! happy crew,

				 				The fire is going out and no one rings

				 				For coals, and therefore no coals Betty brings.

				 				A fly is in the milk-pot⁠—must he die

				 				By a humane society?

				 				No, no; there Mr. Werter takes his spoon,

				 				Inserts it, dips the handle, and lo! soon

				 				The little straggler, sav’d from perils dark,

				 				Across the teaboard draws a long wet mark.



			 				Arise! take snuffers by the handle,

				 				There’s a large cauliflower in each candle.

				 				A winding-sheet, ah me! I must away

				 				To No. 7, just beyond the circus gay.

				 				“Alas, my friend! your coat sits very well;

				 				Where may your Taylor live?” “I may not tell.

				 				O pardon me⁠—I’m absent now and then.

				 				Where might my Taylor live? I say again

				 				I cannot tell, let me no more be teaz’d⁠—

				 				He lives in Wapping, might live where he pleas’d.





To Autumn




I


				 					Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness,

					 					Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun;

					 					Conspiring with him how to load and bless

					 					With fruit the vines that round the thatch-eaves run;

					 					To bend with apples the moss’d cottage-trees,

					 					And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core;

					 					To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells

					 					With a sweet kernel; to set budding more,

					 					And still more, later flowers for the bees,

					 					Until they think warm days will never cease,

					 					For Summer has o’er-brimm’d their clammy cells.





II


				 					Who hath not seen thee oft amid thy store?

					 					Sometimes whoever seeks abroad may find

					 					Thee sitting careless on a granary floor,

					 					Thy hair soft-lifted by the winnowing wind;

					 					Or on a half-reap’d furrow sound asleep,

					 					Drowsed with the fume of poppies, while thy hook

					 					Spares the next swath and all its twined flowers:

					 					And sometimes like a gleaner thou dost keep

					 					Steady thy laden head across a brook;

					 					Or by a cider-press, with patient look,

					 					Thou watchest the last oozings, hours by hours.





III


				 					Where are the songs of Spring? Ay, where are they?

					 					Think not of them, thou hast thy music too,⁠—

					 					While barred clouds bloom the soft-dying day,

					 					And touch the stubble-plains with rosy hue;

					 					Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn

					 					Among the river-sallows, borne aloft

					 					Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies;

					 					And full-grown lambs loud bleat from hilly bourn;

					 					Hedge-crickets sing; and now with treble soft

					 					The redbreast whistles from a garden-croft,

					 					And gathering swallows twitter in the skies.





Sonnet


			 				The day is gone, and all its sweets are gone!

				 				Sweet voice, sweet lips, soft hand, and softer breast,

				 				Warm breath, light whisper, tender semi-tone,

				 				Bright eyes, accomplish’d shape, and lang’rous waist!

				 				Faded the flower and all its budded charms,

				 				Faded the sight of beauty from my eyes,

				 				Faded the shape of beauty from my arms,

				 				Faded the voice, warmth, whiteness, paradise!

				 				Vanish’d unseasonably at shut of eve,

				 				When the dusk holiday⁠—or holinight⁠—

				 				Of fragrant-curtain’d love begins to weave

				 				The woof of darkness thick, for hid delight:

				 				But, as I’ve read love’s missal through to-day,

				 				He’ll let me sleep, seeing I fast and pray.





To Fanny


			 				I cry your mercy⁠—pity⁠—love⁠—aye, love!

				 				Merciful love that tantalizes not,

				 				One-thoughted, never-wandering, guileless love,

				 				Unmask’d, and being seen⁠—without a blot!

				 				O! let me have thee whole,⁠—all⁠—all⁠—be mine!

				 				That shape, that fairness, that sweet minor zest

				 				Of love, your kiss,⁠—those hands, those eyes divine,

				 				That warm, white, lucent, million-pleasured breast,⁠—

				 				Yourself⁠—your soul⁠—in pity give me all,

				 				Withhold no atom’s atom, or I die,

				 				Or living on perhaps, your wretched thrall,

				 				Forget, in the mist of idle misery,

				 				Life’s purposes⁠—the palate of my mind

				 				Losing its gust, and my ambition blind!





Lines to Fanny


			 				What can I do to drive away

				 				Remembrance from my eyes? for they have seen,

				 				Aye, an hour ago, my brilliant Queen!

				 				Touch has a memory. O say, love, say,

				 				What can I do to kill it and be free

				 				In my old liberty?

				 				When every fair one that I saw was fair,

				 				Enough to catch me in but half a snare,

				 				Not keep me there:

				 				When, howe’er poor or particolour’d things,

				 				My muse had wings,

				 				And ever ready was to take her course

				 				Whither I bent her force,

				 				Unintellectual, yet divine to me;⁠—

				 				Divine, I say!⁠—What sea-bird o’er the sea

				 				Is a philosopher the while he goes

				 				Winging along where the great water throes?



			 				How shall I do

				 				To get anew

				 				Those moulted feathers, and so mount once more

				 				Above, above

				 				The reach of fluttering Love,

				 				And make him cower lowly while I soar?

				 				Shall I gulp wine? No, that is vulgarism,

				 				A heresy and schism,

				 				Foisted into the canon law of love;⁠—

				 				No,⁠—wine is only sweet to happy men;

				 				More dismal cares

				 				Seize on me unawares,⁠—

				 				Where shall I learn to get my piece again?⁠—

				 				To banish thoughts of that most hateful land,

				 				Dungeoner of my friends, that wicked strand

				 				Where they were wreck’d and live a wrecked life;

				 				That monstrous region, whose dull rivers pour,

				 				Ever from their sordid urns unto the shore,

				 				Unown’d of any weedy-haired gods;

				 				Whose winds, all zephyrless, hold scourging rods,

				 				Iced in the great lakes, to afflict mankind;

				 				Whose rank-grown forests, frosted, black, and blind,

				 				Would fright a Dryad; whose harsh herbaged meads

				 				Make lean and lank the starved ox while he feeds;

				 				There bad flowers have no scent, birds no sweet song,

				 				And great unerring Nature once seems wrong.



			 				O, for some sunny spell

				 				To dissipate the shadows of this hell!

				 				Say they are gone,⁠—with the new dawning light

				 				Steps forth my lady bright!

				 				O, let me once more rest

				 				My soul upon that dazzling breast!

				 				Let once again these aching arms be placed,

				 				The tender gaolers of thy waist!

				 				And let me feel that warm breath here and there

				 				To spread a rapture in my very hair,⁠—

				 				O, the sweetness of the pain!

				 				Give me those lips again!

				 				Enough! Enough! it is enough for me

				 				To dream of thee!





Hyperion: A Vision


				An attempt at remodelling the fragment of Hyperion into the form of a vision.





Canto I


				 					Fanatics have their dreams, wherewith they weave

					 					A paradise for a sect; the savage, too,

					 					From forth the loftiest fashion of his sleep

					 					Guesses at heaven; pity these have not

					 					Trac’d upon vellum or wild Indian leaf

					 					The shadows of melodious utterance,

					 					But bare of laurel they live, dream, and die;

					 					For Poesy alone can tell her dreams,⁠—

					 					With the fine spell of words alone can save

					 					Imagination from the sable chain

					 					And dumb enchantment. Who alive can say,

					 					“Thou art no Poet⁠—may’st not tell thy dreams?”

					 					Since every man whose soul is not a clod

					 					Hath visions and would speak, if he had loved,

					 					And been well nurtured in his mother tongue.

					 					Whether the dream now purpos’d to rehearse

					 					Be poet’s or fanatic’s will be known

					 					When this warm scribe, my hand, is in the grave.



				 					Methought I stood where trees of every clime,

					 					Palm, myrtle, oak, and sycamore, and beech,

					 					With plantane and spice-blossoms, made a screen,

					 					In neighbourhood of fountains (by the noise

					 					Soft-showering in mine ears), and (by the touch

					 					Of scent) not far from roses. Twining round

					 					I saw an arbour with a drooping roof

					 					Of trellis vines, and bells, and larger blooms,

					 					Like floral censers, swinging light in air;

					 					Before its wreathed doorway, on a mound

					 					Of moss, was spread a feast of summer fruits,

					 					Which, nearer seen, seem’d refuse of a meal

					 					By angel tasted or our Mother Eve;

					 					For empty shells were scatter’d on the grass,

					 					And grapestalks but half-bare, and remnants more

					 					Sweet-smelling, whose pure kinds I could not know.

					 					Still was more plenty than the fabled horn

					 					Thrice emptied could pour forth at banqueting,

					 					For Proserpine return’d to her own fields,

					 					Where the white heifers low. And appetite,

					 					More yearning than on earth I ever felt,

					 					Growing within, I ate deliciously,⁠—

					 					And, after not long, thirsted; for thereby

					 					Stood a cool vessel of transparent juice

					 					Sipp’d by the wander’d bee, the which I took,

					 					And pledging all the mortals of the world,

					 					And all the dead whose names are in our lips,

					 					Drank. That full draught is parent of my theme.

					 					No Asian poppy nor elixir fine

					 					Of the soon fading, jealous Caliphat,

					 					No poison gender’d in close monkish cell.

					 					To thin the scarlet conclave of old men,

					 					Could so have rapt unwilling life away.

					 					Among the fragrant husks and berries crush’d

					 					Upon the grass, I struggled hard against

					 					The domineering potion, but in vain.

					 					The cloudy swoon came on, and down I sank,

					 					Like a Silenus on an antique vase.

					 					How long I slumber’d ’tis a chance to guess.

					 					When sense of life return’d, I started up

					 					As if with wings, but the fair trees were gone,

					 					The mossy mound and arbour were no more:

					 					I look’d around upon the curved sides

					 					Of an old sanctuary, with roof august,

					 					Builded so high, it seem’d that filmed clouds

					 					Might spread beneath as o’er the stars of heaven.

					 					So old the place was, I remember’d none

					 					The like upon the earth: what I had seen

					 					Of grey cathedrals, buttress’d walls, rent towers,

					 					The superannuations of sunk realms,

					 					Or Nature’s rocks toil’d hard in waves and winds,

					 					Seem’d but the faulture of decrepit things

					 					To that eternal domed monument.

					 					Upon the marble at my feet there lay

					 					Store of strange vessels and large draperies,

					 					Which needs had been of dyed asbestos wove,

					 					Or in that place the moth could not corrupt,

					 					So white the linen, so, in some, distinct

					 					Ran imageries from a sombre loom.

					 					All in a mingled heap confus’d there lay

					 					Robes, golden tongs, censer and chafing-dish,

					 					Girdles, and chains, and holy jewelries.



				 					Turning from these with awe, once more I raised

					 					My eyes to fathom the space every way:

					 					The embossed roof, the silent massy range

					 					Of columns north and south, ending in mist

					 					Of nothing; then to eastward, where black gates

					 					Were shut against the sunrise evermore;

					 					Then to the west I look’d, and saw far off

					 					An image, huge of feature as a cloud,

					 					At level of whose feet an altar slept,

					 					To be approach’d on either side by steps

					 					And marble balustrade, and patient travail

					 					To count with toil the innumerable degrees.

					 					Toward the altar sober-pac’d I went,

					 					Repressing haste as too unholy there;

					 					And, coming nearer, saw beside the shrine

					 					One ministering; and there arose a flame

					 					When in mid-day the sickening east-wind

					 					Shifts sudden to the south, the small warm rain

					 					Melts out the frozen incense from all flowers,

					 					And fills the air with so much pleasant health

					 					That even the dying man forgets his shroud;⁠—

					 					Even so that lofty sacrificial fire,

					 					Sending forth Maian incense, spread around

					 					Forgetfulness of everything but bliss,

					 					And clouded all the altar with soft smoke;

					 					From whose white fragrant curtains thus I heard

					 					Language pronounc’d: “If thou canst not ascend

					 					These steps, die on that marble where thou art.

					 					Thy flesh, near cousin to the common dust,

					 					Will parch for lack of nutriment; thy bones

					 					Will wither in few years, and vanish so

					 					That not the quickest eye could find a grain

					 					Of what thou now art on that pavement cold.

					 					The sands of thy short life are spent this hour,

					 					And no hand in the universe can turn

					 					Thy hourglass, if these gummed leaves be burnt

					 					Ere thou canst mount up these immortal steps.”

					 					I heard, I look’d: two senses both at once,

					 					So fine, so subtle, felt the tyranny

					 					Of that fierce threat and the hard task proposed.

					 					Prodigious seem’d the toil; the leaves were yet

					 					Burning, when suddenly a palsied chill

					 					Struck from the paved level up my limbs,

					 					And was ascending quick to put cold grasp

					 					Upon those streams that pulse beside the throat.

					 					I shriek’d, and the sharp anguish of my shriek

					 					Stung my own ears; I strove hard to escape

					 					The numbness, strove to gain the lowest step.

					 					Slow, heavy, deadly was my pace: the cold

					 					Grew stifling, suffocating at the heart;

					 					And when I clasp’d my hands I felt them not.

					 					One minute before death my ic’d foot touch’d

					 					The lowest stair; and, as it touch’d, life seem’d

					 					To pour in at the toes, I mounted up

					 					As once fair angels on a ladder flew

					 					From the green turf to heaven. “Holy Power,”

					 					Cried I, approaching near the horned shrine,

					 					“What am I that should so be saved from death?

					 					What am I that another death come not

					 					To choke my utterance, sacrilegious, here?”

					 					Then said the veiled shadow: “Thou hast felt

					 					What ’tis to die and live again before

					 					Thy fated hour; that thou hadst power to do so

					 					Is thine own safety; thou hast dated on

					 					Thy doom.” “High Prophetess,” said I, “purge off

					 					Benign, if so it please thee, my mind’s film.”

					 					“None can usurp this height,” return’d that shade,

					 					“But those to whom the miseries of the world

					 					Are misery, and will not let them rest.

					 					All else who find a haven in the world,

					 					Where they may thoughtless sleep away their days,

					 					If by a chance into this fane they come,

					 					Rot on the pavement where thou rottedst half.

					 					“Are there not thousands in the world,” said I,

					 					Encourag’d by the sooth voice of the shade,

					 					“Who love their fellows even to the death,

					 					Who feel the giant agony of the world,

					 					And more, like slaves to poor humanity,

					 					Labour for mortal good? I sure should see

					 					Other men here, but I am here alone.”

					 					“Those whom thou spakest of are no visionaries,”

					 					Rejoin’d that voice; “they are no dreamers weak;

					 					They seek no wonder but the human face,

					 					No music but a happy-noted voice:

					 					They come not here, they have no thought to come;

					 					And thou art here, for thou art less than they.

					 					What benefit canst thou do, or all thy tribe,

					 					To the great world? Thou art a dreaming thing,

					 					A fever of thyself: think of the earth;

					 					What bliss, even in hope, is there for thee?

					 					What haven? every creature hath its home,

					 					Every sole man hath days of joy and pain,

					 					Whether his labours be sublime or low⁠—

					 					The pain alone, the joy alone, distinct:

					 					Only the dreamer venoms all his days,

					 					Bearing more woe than all his sins deserve.

					 					Therefore, that happiness be somewhat shared,

					 					Such things as thou art are admitted oft

					 					Into like gardens thou didst pass erewhile,

					 					And suffer’d in these temples: for that cause

					 					Thou standest safe beneath this statue’s knees.”



				 					“That I am favour’d for unworthiness,

					 					By such propitious parley medicined

					 					In sickness not ignoble, I rejoice,

					 					Aye, and could weep for love of such award.”

					 					So answer’d I, continuing, “If it please,

					 					Majestic shadow, tell me where I am,

					 					Whose altar this, for whom this incense curls;

					 					What image this whose face I cannot see

					 					For the broad marble knees; and who thou art,

					 					Of accent feminine so courteous?”



				 					Then the tall shade, in drooping linen veil’d,

					 					Spoke out, so much more earnest, that her breath

					 					Stirr’d the thin folds of gauze that drooping hung

					 					About a golden censer from her hand

					 					Pendent; and by her voice I knew she shed

					 					Long-treasured tears. “This temple, sad and lone,

					 					Is all spar’d from the thunder of a war

					 					Foughten long since by giant hierarchy

					 					Against rebellion: this old image here,

					 					Whose carved features wrinkled as he fell,

					 					Is Saturn’s; I, Moneta, left supreme,

					 					Sole goddess of this desolation.”

					 					I had no words to answer, for my tongue,

					 					Useless, could find about its roofed home

					 					No syllable of a fit majesty

					 					To make rejoinder to Moneta’s mourn:

					 					There was a silence, while the altar’s blaze

					 					Was fainting for sweet food. I look’d thereon,

					 					And on the paved floor, where nigh were piled

					 					Faggots of cinnamon, and many heaps

					 					Of other crisped spicewood: then again

					 					I look’d upon the altar, and its horns

					 					Whiten’d with ashes, and its languorous flame,

					 					And then upon the offerings again;

					 					And so, by turns, till sad Moneta cried:

					 					“The sacrifice is done, but not the less

					 					Will I be kind to thee for thy good will.

					 					My power, which to me is still a curse,

					 					Shall be to thee a wonder; for the scenes

					 					Still swooning vivid through my globed brain,

					 					With an electral changing misery,

					 					Thou shalt with these dull mortal eyes behold

					 					Free from all pain, if wonder pain thee not.”

					 					As near as an immortal’s sphered words

					 					Could to a mother’s soften were these last:

					 					And yet I had a terror of her robes,

					 					And chiefly of the veils that from her brow

					 					Hung pale, and curtain’d her in mysteries,

					 					That made my heart too small to hold its blood.

					 					This saw that Goddess, and with sacred hand

					 					Parted the veils. Then saw I a wan face,

					 					Not pin’d by human sorrows, but bright-blanch’d

					 					By an immortal sickness which kills not;

					 					It works a constant change, which happy death

					 					Can put no end to; deathwards progressing

					 					To no death was that visage; it had past

					 					The lily and the snow; and beyond these

					 					I must not think now, though I saw that face.

					 					But for her eyes I should have fled away;

					 					They held me back with a benignant light,

					 					Soft, mitigated by divinest lids

					 					Half-clos’d, and visionless entire they seem’d

					 					Of all external things; they saw me not,

					 					But in blank splendour beam’d, like the mild moon,

					 					Who comforts those she sees not, who knows not

					 					What eyes are upward cast. As I had found

					 					A grain of gold upon a mountain’s side,

					 					And, twing’d with avarice, strain’d out my eyes

					 					To search its sullen entrails rich with ore,

					 					So, at the view of sad Moneta’s brow,

					 					I ask’d to see what things the hollow brow

					 					Behind environ’d: what high tragedy

					 					In the dark secret chambers of her skull

					 					Was acting, that could give so dread a stress

					 					To her cold lips, and fill with such a light

					 					Her planetary eyes, and touch her voice

					 					With such a sorrow? “Shade of Memory!”

					 					Cried I, with act adorant at her feet,

					 					“By all the gloom hung round thy fallen house,

					 					By this last temple, by the golden age,

					 					By great Apollo, thy dear foster-child,

					 					And by thyself, forlorn divinity,

					 					The pale Omega of a wither’d race,

					 					Let me behold, according as thou saidst,

					 					What in thy brain so ferments to and fro!”

					 					No sooner had this conjuration past

					 					My devout lips, than side by side we stood

					 					(Like a stunt bramble by a solemn pine)

					 					Deep in the shady sadness of a vale

					 					Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn,

					 					Far from the fiery noon and eve’s one star.

					 					Onward I look’d beneath the gloomy boughs,

					 					And saw what first I thought an image huge,

					 					Like to the image pedestall’d so high

					 					In Saturn’s temple; then Moneta’s voice

					 					Came brief upon mine ear. “So Saturn sat

					 					When he had lost his realms;” whereon there grew

					 					A power within me of enormous ken

					 					To see as a god sees, and take the depth

					 					Of things as nimbly as the outward eye

					 					Can size and shape pervade. The lofty theme

					 					Of those few words hung vast before my mind

					 					With half-unravell’d web. I sat myself

					 					Upon an eagle’s watch, that I might see,

					 					And seeing ne’er forget. No stir of life

					 					Was in this shrouded vale,⁠—not so much air

					 					As in the zoning of a summer’s day

					 					Robs not one light seed from the feather’d grass

					 					But where the dead leaf fell there did it rest.

					 					A stream went noiseless by, still deaden’d more

					 					By reason of the fallen divinity

					 					Spreading more shade; the Naiad ’mid her reeds

					 					Prest her cold finger closer to her lips.



				 					Along the margin-sand large foot-marks went

					 					No further than to where old Saturn’s feet

					 					Had rested, and there slept how long a sleep!

					 					Degraded, cold, upon the sodden ground

					 					His old right hand lay nerveless, listless, dead,

					 					Unsceptred, and his realmless eyes were closed;

					 					While his bowed head seem’d listening to the Earth,

					 					His ancient mother, for some comfort yet.



				 					It seem’d no force could wake him from his place;

					 					But there came one who, with a kindred hand,

					 					Touch’d his wide shoulders, after bending low

					 					With reverence, though to one who knew it not.

					 					Then came the grieved voice Mnemosyne,

					 					And griev’d I hearken’d. “That divinity

					 					Whom thou saw’st step from yon forlornest wood,

					 					And with slow pace approach our fallen king,

					 					Is Thea, softest-natured of our brood.”

					 					I mark’d the Goddess, in fair statuary

					 					Surpassing wan Moneta by the head,

					 					And in her sorrow nearer woman’s tears.

					 					There was a list’ning fear in her regard,

					 					As if calamity had but begun;

					 					As if the venom’d cloud of evil days

					 					Had spent their malice, and the sullen rear

					 					Was with its stored thunder labouring up,

					 					One hand she press’d upon that aching spot

					 					Where beats the human heart, as if just there,

					 					Though an immortal, she felt cruel pain;

					 					The other upon Saturn’s bended neck

					 					She laid, and to the level of his ear

					 					Leaning, with parted lips some words she spoke

					 					In solemn tenour and deep organ-tone;

					 					Some mourning words, which in our feeble tongue

					 					Would come in this like accenting; how frail

					 					To that large utterance of the early gods!



				 					“Saturn, look up! and for what, poor lost king?

					 					I have no comfort for thee; no, not one;

					 					I cannot say, wherefore thus sleepest thou?

					 					For Heaven is parted from thee, and the Earth

					 					Knows thee not, so afflicted, for a god.

					 					The Ocean, too, with all its solemn noise,

					 					Has from thy sceptre pass’d; and all the air

					 					Is emptied of thy hoary majesty.

					 					Thy thunder, captious at the new command,

					 					Rumbles reluctant o’er our fallen house;

					 					And thy sharp lightning, in unpractis’d hands,

					 					Scourges and burns our once serene domain.



				 					“With such remorseless speed still come new woes,

					 					That unbelief has not a space to breathe.

					 					Saturn! sleep on: me thoughtless, why should I

					 					Thus violate thy slumbrous solitude?

					 					Why should I ope thy melancholy eyes?

					 					Saturn! sleep on, while at thy feet I weep.”



				 					As when upon a tranced summer-night

					 					Forests, branch-charmed by the earnest stars,

					 					Dream, and so dream all night without a noise,

					 					Save from one gradual solitary gust

					 					Swelling upon the silence, dying off,

					 					As if the ebbing air had but one wave,

					 					So came these words and went; the while in tears

					 					She prest her fair large forehead to the earth,

					 					Just where her fallen hair might spread in curls,

					 					A soft and silken net for Saturn’s feet.

					 					Long, long these two were postured motionless,

					 					Like sculpture builded-up upon the grave

					 					Of their own power. A long awful time

					 					I look’d upon them: still they were the same;

					 					The frozen God still bending to the earth,

					 					And the sad Goddess weeping at his feet;

					 					Moneta silent. Without stay or prop

					 					But my own weak mortality, I bore

					 					The load of this eternal quietude,

					 					The unchanging gloom and the three fixed shapes

					 					Ponderous upon my senses, a whole moon;

					 					For by my burning brain I measured sure

					 					Her silver seasons shedded on the night,

					 					And every day by day methought I grew

					 					More gaunt and ghostly. Oftentimes I pray’d

					 					Intense, that death would take me from the vale

					 					And all its burthens; gasping with despair

					 					Of change, hour after hour I curs’d myself,

					 					Until old Saturn rais’d his faded eyes,

					 					And look’d around and saw his kingdom gone,

					 					And all the gloom and sorrow of the place,

					 					And that fair kneeling Goddess at his feet.



				 					As the moist scent of flowers, and grass, and leaves

					 					Fills forest-dells with a pervading air,

					 					Known to the woodland nostril, so the words

					 					Of Saturn fill’d the mossy glooms around,

					 					Even to the hollows of time-eaten oaks,

					 					And to the windings of the foxes’ hole,

					 					With sad, low tones, while thus he spoke, and sent

					 					Strange moanings to the solitary Pan.

					 					“Moan, brethren, moan, for we are swallow’d up

					 					And buried from all godlike exercise

					 					Of influence benign on planets pale,

					 					And peaceful sway upon man’s harvesting,

					 					And all those acts which Deity supreme

					 					Doth ease its heart of love in. Moan and wail;

					 					Moan, brethren, moan; for lo, the rebel spheres

					 					Spin round; the stars their ancient courses keep;

					 					Clouds still with shadowy moisture haunt the earth,

					 					Still suck their fill of light from sun and moon;

					 					Still buds the tree, and still the seashores murmur;

					 					There is no death in all the universe,

					 					No smell of death.⁠—There shall be death. Moan, moan;

					 					Moan, Cybele, moan; for thy pernicious babes

					 					Have chang’d a god into an aching palsy.

					 					Moan, brethren, moan, for I have no strength left;

					 					Weak as the reed, weak, feeble as my voice.

					 					Oh! Oh! the pain, the pain of feebleness;

					 					Moan, moan, for still I thaw; or give me help,

					 					Throw down those imps, and give me victory.

					 					Let me hear other groans, and trumpets blown

					 					Of triumph calm, and hymns of festival,

					 					From the gold peaks of heaven’s high-piled clouds;

					 					Voices of soft proclaim, and silver stir

					 					Of strings in hollow shells; and there shall be

					 					Beautiful things made new, for the surprise

					 					Of the sky-children.” So he feebly ceased,

					 					With such a poor and sickly-sounding pause,

					 					Methought I heard some old man of the earth

					 					Bewailing earthly loss; nor could my eyes

					 					And ears act with that unison of sense

					 					Which marries sweet sound with the grace of form,

					 					And dolorous accent from a tragic harp

					 					With large limb’d visions. More I scrutinized.

					 					Still fixt he sat beneath the sable trees,

					 					Whose arms spread straggling in wild serpent forms,

					 					With leaves all hush’d; his awful presence there

					 					(Now all was silent) gave a deadly lie

					 					To what I ere while heard: only his lips

					 					Trembled amid the white curls of his beard;

					 					They told the truth, though round the snowy locks

					 					Hung nobly, as upon the face of heaven

					 					A mid-day fleece of clouds. Thea arose

					 					And stretcht her white arm through the hollow dark,

					 					Pointing somewhither: whereat he too rose,

					 					Like a vast giant, seen by men at sea

					 					To grow pale from the waves at dull midnight.

					 					They melted from my sight into the woods;

					 					Ere I could turn, Moneta cried, “These twain

					 					Are speeding to the families of grief,

					 					Where, rooft in by black rocks, they waste in pain

					 					And darkness, for no hope.” And she spake on,

					 					As ye may read who can unwearied pass

					 					Onward from the antechamber of this dream,

					 					Where, even at the open doors, awhile

					 					I must delay, and glean my memory

					 					Of her high phrase⁠—perhaps no further dare.





Canto II


				 					“Mortal, that thou may’st understand aright,

					 					I humanize my sayings to thine ear,

					 					Making comparisons of earthly things;

					 					Or thou might’st better listen to the wind,

					 					Whose language is to thee a barren noise,

					 					Though it blows legend-laden thro’ the trees.

					 					In melancholy realms big tears are shed,

					 					More sorrow like to this, and such like woe,

					 					Too huge for mortal tongue or pen of scribe.

					 					The Titans fierce, self-hid or prison-bound,

					 					Groan for the old allegiance once more,

					 					Listening in their doom for Saturn’s voice.

					 					But one of the whole eagle-brood still keeps

					 					His sovereignty, and rule, and majesty:

					 					Blazing Hyperion on his orbed fire

					 					Still sits, still snuffs the incense teeming up

					 					From Man to the Sun’s God⁠—yet insecure.

					 					For as upon the earth dire prodigies

					 					Fright and perplex, so also shudders he;

					 					Not at dog’s howl or gloom-bird’s hated screech,

					 					Or the familiar visiting of one

					 					Upon the first toll of his passing bell,

					 					Or prophesyings of the midnight lamp;

					 					But horrors, portioned to a giant nerve,

					 					Make great Hyperion ache. His palace bright,

					 					Bastion’d with pyramids of shining gold,

					 					And touch’d with shade of bronzed obelisks,

					 					Glares a blood-red thro’ all the thousand courts,

					 					Arches, and domes, and fiery galleries;

					 					And all its curtains of Aurorian clouds

					 					Flash angerly; when he would taste the wreaths

					 					Of incense breath’d aloft from sacred hills,

					 					Instead of sweets, his ample palate takes

					 					Savour of poisonous brass and metals sick;

					 					Wherefore when harbour’d in the sleepy West,

					 					After the full completion of fair day.

					 					For rest divine upon exalted couch,

					 					And slumber in the arms of melody,

					 					He paces through the pleasant hours of ease,

					 					With strides colossal, on from hall to hall,

					 					While far within each aisle and deep recess

					 					His winged minions in close clusters stand

					 					Amaz’d, and full of fear; like anxious men,

					 					Who on a wide plain gather in sad troops,

					 					When earthquakes jar their battlements and towers.

					 					Even now where Saturn, rous’d from icy trance,

					 					Goes step for step with Thea from yon woods,

					 					Hyperion, leaving twilight in the rear,

					 					Is sloping to the threshold of the West.

					 					Thither we tend.” Now in clear light I stood,

					 					Reliev’d from the dusk vale. Mnemosyne

					 					Was sitting on a square-edg’d polish’d stone,

					 					That in its lucid depths reflected pure

					 					Her priestess’ garments. My quick eyes ran on

					 					From stately nave to nave, from vault to vault,

					 					Through bow’rs of fragrant and enwreathed light,

					 					And diamond-paved lustrous long arcades.

					 					Anon rush’d by the bright Hyperion;

					 					His flaming robes stream’d out beyond his heels,

					 					And gave a roar as if of earthly fire,

					 					That scar’d away the meek ethereal hours,

					 					And made their dove-wings tremble. On he flared.





					The Cap and Bells 					Or, The Jealousies





A Faery Tale. Unfinished





I


				 					In midmost Ind, beside Hydaspes cool,

					 					There stood, or hover’d, tremulous in the air,

					 					A faery city, ’neath the potent rule

					 					Of Emperor Elfinan; fam’d ev’rywhere

					 					For love of mortal women, maidens fair,

					 					Whose lips were solid, whose soft hands were made

					 					Of a fit mould and beauty, ripe and rare,

					 					To pamper his slight wooing, warm yet staid:

					 					He loved girls smooth as shades, but hated a mere shade.





II


				 					This was a crime forbidden by the law;

					 					And all the priesthood of his city wept,

					 					For ruin and dismay they well foresaw,

					 					If impious prince no bound or limit kept,

					 					And faery Zendervester overstept;

					 					They wept, he sinn’d, and still he would sin on,

					 					They dreamt of sin, and he sinn’d while they slept;

					 					In vain the pulpit thunder’d at the throne,

					 					Caricature was vain, and vain the tart lampoon.





III


				 					Which seeing, his high court of parliament

					 					Laid a remonstrance at his Highness’ feet,

					 					Praying his royal senses to content

					 					Themselves with what in faery land was sweet,

					 					Befitting best that shade with shade should meet:

					 					Whereat, to calm their fears, he promised soon

					 					From mortal tempters all to make retreat⁠—

					 					Ay, even on the first of the new moon,

					 					An immaterial wife to espouse as heaven’s boon.





IV


				 					Meantime he sent a fluttering embassy

					 					To Pigmio, of Imaus sovereign,

					 					To half beg, and half demand, respectfully,

					 					The hand of his fair daughter Bellanaine;

					 					An audience had, and speeching done, they gain

					 					Their point, and bring the weeping bride away;

					 					Whom, with but one attendant, safely lain

					 					Upon their wings, they bore in bright array,

					 					While little harps were touch’d by many a lyric fay.





V


				 					As in old pictures tender cherubim

					 					A child’s soul thro’ the sapphired canvas bear,

					 					So, thro’ a real heaven, on they swim

					 					With the sweet princess on her plumaged lair,

					 					Speed giving to the winds her lustrous hair;

					 					And so she journey’d, sleeping or awake,

					 					Save when, for healthful exercise and air,

					 					She chose to “promener à l’aile,” or take

					 					A pigeon’s somerset, for sport or change’s sake.





VI


				 					“Dear Princess, do not whisper me so loud,”

					 					Quoth Corallina, nurse and confidant,

					 					“Do not you see there, lurking in a cloud,

					 					Close at your back, that sly old Crafticant?

					 					He hears a whisper plainer than a rant:

					 					Dry up your tears, and do not look so blue;

					 					He’s Elfinan’s great state-spy militant,

					 					He’s running, lying, flying footman, too⁠—

					 					Dear mistress, let him have no handle against you!





VII


				 					“Show him a mouse’s tail, and he will guess,

					 					With metaphysic swiftness, at the mouse;

					 					Show him a garden, and with speed no less,

					 					He’ll surmise sagely of a dwelling-house,

					 					And plot, in the same minute, how to chouse

					 					The owner out of it; show him a⁠—” “Peace!

					 					Peace! nor contrive thy mistress’ ire to rouse!”

					 					Return’d the princess, “my tongue shall not cease

					 					Till from this hated match I get a free release.





VIII


				 					“Ah, beauteous mortal!” “Hush!” quoth Coralline,

					 					“Really you must not talk of him indeed.”

					 					“You hush!” replied the mistress, with a shine

					 					Of anger in her eyes, enough to breed

					 					In stouter hearts than nurse’s fear and dread:

					 					’Twas not the glance itself made nursey flinch,

					 					But of its threat she took the utmost heed;

					 					Not liking in her heart an hour-long pinch,

					 					Or a sharp needle run into her back an inch.





IX


				 					So she was silenced, and fair Bellanaine,

					 					Writhing her little body with ennui,

					 					Continued to lament and to complain,

					 					That Fate, cross-purposing, should let her be

					 					Ravish’d away, far from her dear countree;

					 					That all her feelings should be set at nought,

					 					In trumping up this match so hastily,

					 					With lowland blood; and lowland blood she thought

					 					Poison, as every stanch true-born Imaian ought.





X


				 					Sorely she grieved, and wetted three or four

					 					White Provence rose-leaves with her faery tears,

					 					But not for this cause;⁠—alas! she had more

					 					Bad reasons for her sorrow, as appears

					 					In the famed memoirs of a thousand years,

					 					Written by Crafticant, and published

					 					By Parpaglion and Co., (those sly compeers

					 					Who raked up ev’ry fact against the dead,)

					 					In Scarab Street, Panthea, at the Jubal’s Head.





XI


				 					Where, after a long hypercritic howl

					 					Against the vicious manners of the age,

					 					He goes on to expose, with heart and soul,

					 					What vice in this or that year was the rage,

					 					Backbiting all the world in every page;

					 					With special strictures on the horrid crime,

					 					(Section’d and subsection’d with learning sage,)

					 					Of faeries stooping on their wings sublime

					 					To kiss a mortal’s lips, when such were in their prime.





XII


				 					Turn to the copious index, you will find

					 					Somewhere in the column, headed letter B,

					 					The name of Bellanaine, if you’re not blind;

					 					Then pray refer to the text, and you will see

					 					An article made up of calumny

					 					Against this highland princess, rating her

					 					For giving way, so over fashionably,

					 					To this new-fangled vice, which seems a burr

					 					Stuck in his moral throat, no coughing e’er could stir.





XIII


				 					There he says plainly that she loved a man!

					 					That she around him flutter’d, flirted, toy’d,

					 					Before her marriage with great Elfinan;

					 					That after marriage too, she never joy’d

					 					In husband’s company, but still employ’d

					 					Her wits to ’scape away to Angle-land;

					 					Where lived the youth, who worried and annoy’d

					 					Her tender heart, and its warm ardours fann’d

					 					To such a dreadful blaze, her side would scorch her hand.





XIV


				 					But let us leave this idle tittle-tattle

					 					To waiting-maids, and bed-room coteries,

					 					Nor till fit time against her fame wage battle.

					 					Poor Elfinan is very ill at ease,

					 					Let us resume his subject if you please:

					 					For it may comfort and console him much,

					 					To rhyme and syllable his miseries;

					 					Poor Elfinan! whose cruel fate was such,

					 					He sat and cursed a bride he knew he could not touch.





XV


				 					Soon as (according to his promises)

					 					The bridal embassy had taken wing,

					 					And vanish’d, bird-like, o’er the suburb trees,

					 					The emperor, empierced with the sharp sting

					 					Of love, retired, vex’d and murmuring

					 					Like any drone shut from the fair bee-queen,

					 					Into his cabinet, and there did fling

					 					His limbs upon the sofa, full of spleen,

					 					And damn’d his House of Commons, in complete chagrin.





XVI


				 					“I’ll trounce some of the members,” cried the Prince,

					 					“I’ll put a mark against some rebel names,

					 					I’ll make the Opposition-benches wince,

					 					I’ll show them very soon, to all their shames,

					 					What ’tis to smother up a Prince’s flames;

					 					That ministers should join in it, I own,

					 					Surprises me!⁠—they too at these high games!

					 					Am I an Emperor? Do I wear a crown?

					 					Imperial Elfinan, go hang thyself or drown!





XVII


				 					“I’ll trounce ’em!⁠—there’s the square-cut chancellor,

					 					His son shall never touch that bishopric;

					 					And for the nephew of old Palfior,

					 					I’ll show him that his speeches made me sick,

					 					And give the colonelcy to Phalaric;

					 					The tiptoe marquis, moral and gallant,

					 					Shall lodge in shabby taverns upon tick;

					 					And for the Speaker’s second cousin’s aunt,

					 					She sha’n’t be maid of honour,⁠—by heaven that she sha’n’t!





XVIII


				 					“I’ll shirk the Duke of A.; I’ll cut his brother;

					 					I’ll give no garter to his eldest son;

					 					I won’t speak to his sister or his mother!

					 					The Viscount B. shall live at cut-and-run;

					 					But how in the world can I contrive to stun

					 					That fellow’s voice, which plagues me worse than any,

					 					That stubborn fool, that impudent state-dun,

					 					Who sets down ev’ry sovereign as a zany,⁠—

					 					That vulgar commoner, Esquire Biancopany?





XIX


				 					“Monstrous affair! Pshaw! pah! what ugly minx

					 					Will they fetch from Imaus for my bride?

					 					Alas! my wearied heart within me sinks,

					 					To think that I must be so near allied

					 					To a cold dullard fay,⁠—ah, woe betide!

					 					Ah, fairest of all human loveliness!

					 					Sweet Bertha! what crime can it be to glide

					 					About the fragrant plaitings of thy dress,

					 					Or kiss thine eye, or count thy locks, tress after tress?”





XX


				 					So said, one minute’s while his eyes remain’d

					 					Half lidded, piteous, languid, innocent;

					 					But, in a wink, their splendour they regain’d,

					 					Sparkling revenge with amorous fury blent.

					 					Love thwarted in bad temper oft has vent:

					 					He rose, he stampt his foot, he rang the bell,

					 					And order’d some death-warrants to be sent

					 					For signature:⁠—somewhere the tempest fell,

					 					As many a poor fellow does not live to tell.





XXI


				 					“At the same time, Eban,”⁠—(this was his page,

					 					A fay of colour, slave from top to toe,

					 					Sent as a present, while yet under age,

					 					From the Viceroy of Zanguebar,⁠—wise, slow,

					 					His speech, his only words were “yes” and “no,”

					 					But swift of look, and foot, and wing was he,)⁠—

					 					“At the same time, Eban, this instant go

					 					To Hum the soothsayer, whose name I see

					 					Among the fresh arrivals in our empery.





XXII


				 					“Bring Hum to me! But stay⁠—here take my ring,

					 					The pledge of favour, that he not suspect

					 					Any foul play, or awkward murdering

					 					Tho’ I have bowstrung many of his sect;

					 					Throw in a hint, that if he should neglect

					 					One hour the next shall see him in my grasp,

					 					And the next after that shall see him neck’d,

					 					Or swallow’d by my hunger-starved asp,⁠—

					 					And mention (’tis as well) the torture of the wasp.”





XXIII


				 					These orders given, the Prince, in half a pet,

					 					Let o’er the silk his propping elbow slide,

					 					Caught up his little legs, and, in a fret,

					 					Fell on the sofa on his royal side,

					 					The slave retreated backwards, humble-eyed,

					 					And with a slave-like silence closed the door,

					 					And to old Hum thro’ street and alley hied;

					 					He “knew the city,” as we say, of yore,

					 					And for short cuts and turns, was nobody knew more.





XXIV


				 					It was the time when wholesale dealers close

					 					Their shutters with a moody sense of wealth,

					 					But retail dealers, diligent, let loose

					 					The gas (objected to on score of health),

					 					Convey’d in little solder’d pipes by stealth,

					 					And make it flare in many a brilliant form,

					 					That all the powers of darkness it repell’th,

					 					Which to the oil-trade doth great scaith and harm,

					 					And supersedeth quite the use of the glow-worm.





XXV


				 					Eban, untempted by the pastry-cooks,

					 					(Of pastry he got store within the palace,)

					 					With hasty steps, wrapp’d cloak, and solemn looks,

					 					Incognito upon his errand sallies,

					 					His smelling-bottle ready for the allies;

					 					He pass’d the hurdy-gurdies with disdain,

					 					Vowing he’d have them sent on board the galleys;

					 					Just as he made his vow, it ’gan to rain,

					 					Therefore he call’d a coach, and bade it drive amain.





XXVI


				 					“I’ll pull the string,” said he, and further said,

					 					“Polluted Jarvey! Ah, thou filthy hack!

					 					Whose springs of life are all dried up and dead,

					 					Whose linsey-woolsey lining hangs all slack,

					 					Whose rug is straw, whose wholeness is a crack;

					 					And evermore thy steps go clatter-clitter;

					 					Whose glass once up can never be got back,

					 					Who prov’st, with jolting arguments and bitter,

					 					That ’tis of modern use to travel in a litter.





XXVII


				 					“Thou inconvenience! thou hungry crop

					 					For all corn! thou snail-creeper to and fro,

					 					Who while thou goest ever seem’st to stop,

					 					And fiddle-faddle standest while you go;

					 					I’ the morning, freighted with a weight of woe,

					 					Unto some lazar-house thou journeyest,

					 					And in the evening tak’st a double row

					 					Of dowdies for some dance or party drest,

					 					Besides the goods meanwhile thou movest east and west.





XXVIII


				 					“By thy ungallant bearing and sad mien,

					 					An inch appears the utmost thou couldst budge:

					 					Yet at the slightest nod, or hint, or sign,

					 					Round to the curb-stone patient dost thou trudge,

					 					School’d in a beckon, learned in a nudge,

					 					A dull-eyed Argus watching for a fare;

					 					Quiet and plodding thou dost bear no grudge

					 					To whisking tilburies, or phaetons rare,

					 					Curricles, or mail-coaches, swift beyond compare.”





XXIX


				 					Philosophizing thus, he pull’d the check,

					 					And bade the coachman wheel to such a street,

					 					Who turning much his body, more his neck,

					 					Louted full low, and hoarsely did him greet:

					 					“Certes, Monsieur were best take to his feet,

					 					Seeing his servant can no farther drive

					 					For press of coaches, that to-night here meet,

					 					Many as bees about a straw-capp’d hive,

					 					When first for April honey into faint flowers they dive.”





XXX


				 					Eban then paid his fare, and tiptoe went

					 					To Hum’s hotel; and, as he on did pass

					 					With head inclined, each dusky lineament

					 					Show’d in the pearl-paved street as in a glass;

					 					His purple vest, that ever peeping was

					 					Rich from the fluttering crimson of his cloak,

					 					His silvery trousers, and his silken sash

					 					Tied in a burnish’d knot, their semblance took

					 					Upon the mirror’d walls, wherever he might look.





XXXI


				 					He smiled at self, and, smiling, show’d his teeth,

					 					And seeing his white teeth, he smiled the more;

					 					Lifted his eyebrows, spurn’d the path beneath,

					 					Show’d teeth again, and smiled as heretofore,

					 					Until he knock’d at the magician’s door;

					 					Where, till the porter answer’d, might be seen,

					 					In the clear panel more he could adore,⁠—

					 					His turban wreathed of gold, and white, and green,

					 					Mustachios, ear-ring, nose-ring, and his sabre keen.





XXXII


				 					“Does not your master give a rout to-night?”

					 					Quoth the dark page; “Oh, no!” return’d the Swiss,

					 					“Next door but one to us, upon the right,

					 					The Magazin des Modes now open is

					 					Against the Emperor’s wedding;⁠—and, sir, this

					 					My master finds a monstrous horrid bore;

					 					As he retired, an hour ago I wis,

					 					With his best beard and brimstone, to explore

					 					And cast a quiet figure in his second floor.





XXXIII


				 					“Gad! he’s obliged to stick to business!

					 					For chalk, I hear, stands at a pretty price;

					 					And as for aqua vitæ⁠—there’s a mess!

					 					The dentes sapientiœ of mice

					 					Our barber tells me too are on the rise,⁠—

					 					Tinder’s a lighter article,⁠—nitre pure

					 					Goes off like lightning,⁠—grains of Paradise

					 					At an enormous figure!⁠—stars not sure!⁠—

					 					Zodiac will not move without a slight douceur!





XXXIV


				 					“Venus won’t stir a peg without a fee,

					 					And master is too partial entre nous

					 					To⁠—” “Hush⁠—hush!” cried Eban, “sure that is he

					 					Coming downstairs,⁠—by St. Bartholomew!

					 					As backwards as he can,⁠—is’t something new?

					 					Or is ’t his custom, in the name of fun?”

					 					“He always comes down backward, with one shoe”⁠—

					 					Return’d the porter⁠—“off, and one shoe on,

					 					Like, saving shoe for sock or stocking, my mad John!”





XXXV


				 					It was indeed the great Magician,

					 					Feeling, with careful toe, for every stair,

					 					And retrograding careful as he can,

					 					Backwards and downwards from his own two pair:

					 					“Salpietro!” exclaimed Hum, “is the dog there?

					 					He’s always in my way upon the mat!”

					 					“He’s in the kitchen, or the Lord knows where,”⁠—

					 					Replied the Swiss,⁠—“the nasty, yelping brat!”

					 					“Don’t beat him!” return’d Hum, and on the floor came pat.





XXXVI


				 					Then facing right about, he saw the Page,

					 					And said; “Don’t tell me what you want, Eban;

					 					The Emperor is now in a huge rage,⁠—

					 					’Tis nine to one he’ll give you the rattan!

					 					Let us away!” Away together ran

					 					The plain-dress’d sage and spangled blackamoor,

					 					Nor rested till they stood to cool, and fan,

					 					And breathe themselves at th’ Emperor’s chamber door,

					 					When Eban thought he heard a soft imperial snore.





XXXVII


				 					“I thought you guess’d, foretold, or prophesied,

					 					That’s Majesty was in a raving fit?”

					 					“He dreams,” said Hum, “or I have ever lied,

					 					That he is tearing you, sir, bit by bit.”

					 					“He’s not asleep, and you have little wit,”

					 					Replied the Page, “that little buzzing noise,

					 					Whate’er your palmistry may make of it,

					 					Comes from a plaything of the Emperor’s choice,

					 					From a Man-Tiger-Organ, prettiest of his toys.”





XXXVIII


				 					Eban then usher’d in the learned Seer:

					 					Elfinan’s back was turn’d, but, ne’ertheless,

					 					Both, prostrate on the carpet, ear by ear,

					 					Crept silently, and waited in distress,

					 					Knowing the Emperor’s moody bitterness;

					 					Eban especially, who on the floor ’gan

					 					Tremble and quake to death,⁠—he feared less

					 					A dose of senna-tea, or nightmare Gorgon,

					 					Than the Emperor when he play’d on his Man-Tiger-Organ.





XXXIX


				 					They kiss’d nine times the carpet’s velvet face

					 					Of glossy silk, soft, smooth, and meadow-green,

					 					Where the close eye in deep rich fur might trace

					 					A silver tissue, scantly to be seen,

					 					As daisies lurk’d in June-grass, buds in green;

					 					Sudden the music ceased, sudden the hand

					 					Of majesty, by dint of passion keen,

					 					Doubled into a common fist, went grand,

					 					And knock’d down three cut glasses, and his best ink-stand.





XL


				 					Then turning round, he saw those trembling two:

					 					“Eban,” said he, “as slaves should taste the fruits

					 					Of diligence, I shall remember you

					 					To-morrow, or next day, as time suits,

					 					In a finger conversation with my mutes,⁠—

					 					Begone!⁠—for you, Chaldean! here remain!

					 					Fear not, quake not, and as good wine recruits

					 					A conjurer’s spirits, what cup will you drain?

					 					Sherry in silver, hock in gold, or glass’d champagne?”





XLI


				 					“Commander of the Faithful!” answer’d Hum,

					 					“In preference to these, I’ll merely taste

					 					A thimble-full of old Jamaica rum.”

					 					“A simple boon!” said Elfinan, “thou may’st

					 					Have Nantz, with which my morning-coffee’s laced.”





1


					 					“I’ll have a glass of Nantz, then,”⁠—said the Seer,⁠—

					 					“Made racy⁠—(sure my boldness is misplaced!)⁠—

					 					With the third part⁠—(yet that is drinking dear!)⁠—

					 					Of the least drop of crème de citron crystal clear.”





XLII


				 					“I pledge you. Hum! and pledge my dearest love,

					 					My Bertha!” “Bertha! Bertha!” cried the sage,

					 					“I know a many Berthas!” “Mine’s above

					 					All Berthas!” sighed the Emperor. “I engage,”

					 					Said Hum, “in duty, and in vassalage,

					 					To mention all the Berthas in the earth;⁠—

					 					There’s Bertha Watson,⁠—and Miss Bertha Page,⁠—

					 					This famed for languid eyes, and that for mirth,⁠—

					 					There’s Bertha Blount of York,⁠—and Bertha Knox of Perth.”





XLIII


				 					“You seem to know”⁠—“I do know,” answer’d Hum,

					 					“Your Majesty’s in love with some fine girl

					 					Named Bertha; but her surname will not come,

					 					Without a little conjuring.” “ ’Tis Pearl,

					 					’Tis Bertha Pearl! What makes my brain so whirl?

					 					And she is softer, fairer than her name!”

					 					“Where does she live?” ask’d Hum. “Her fair locks curl

					 					So brightly, they put all our fays to shame!⁠—

					 					Live?⁠—O! at Canterbury, with her old grand dame.”





XLIV


				 					“Good! good!” cried Hum, “I’ve known her from a child!

					 					She is a changeling of my management;

					 					She was born at midnight in an Indian wild;

					 					Her mother’s screams with the striped tiger’s blent,

					 					While the torch-bearing slaves a halloo sent

					 					Into the jungles; and her palanquin,

					 					Rested amid the desert’s dreariment,

					 					Shook with her agony, till fair were seen

					 					The little Bertha’s eyes ope on the stars serene.”





XLV


				 					“I can’t say,” said the monarch, “that may be

					 					Just as it happen’d, true or else a bam!

					 					Drink up your brandy, and sit down by me,

					 					Feel, feel my pulse, how much in love I am;

					 					And if your science is not all a sham,

					 					Tell me some means to get the lady here.”

					 					“Upon my honour!” said the son of Cham,2

					 					“She is my dainty changeling, near and dear,

					 					Although her story sounds at first a little queer.”





XLVI


				 					“Convey her to me, Hum, or by my crown,

					 					My sceptre, and my cross-surmounted globe,

					 					I’ll knock you⁠—” “Does your majesty mean⁠—down?

					 					No, no, you never could my feelings probe

					 					To such a depth!” The Emperor took his robe,

					 					And wept upon its purple palatine,

					 					While Hum continued, shamming half a sob,⁠—

					 					“In Canterbury doth your lady shine?

					 					But let me cool your brandy with a little wine.”





XLVII


				 					Whereat a narrow Flemish glass he took,

					 					That since belong’d to Admiral De Witt,

					 					Admired it with a connoisseuring look,

					 					And with the ripest claret crowned it,

					 					And, ere the lively head could burst and flit,

					 					He turn’d it quickly, nimbly upside down,

					 					His mouth being held conveniently fit

					 					To catch the treasure: “Best in all the town!”

					 					He said, smack’d his moist lips, and gave a pleasant frown.





XLVIII


				 					“Ah! good my Prince, weep not!” And then again

					 					He fill’d a bumper. “Great Sire, do not weep!

					 					Your pulse is shocking, but I’ll ease your pain.”

					 					“Fetch me that Ottoman, and prithee keep

					 					Your voice low,” said the Emperor, “and steep

					 					Some lady’s-fingers nice in Candy wine;

					 					And prithee, Hum, behind the screen do peep

					 					For the rose-water vase, magician mine!

					 					And sponge my forehead⁠—so my love doth make me pine.”





XLIX


				 					“Ah, cursed Bellanaine!” “Don’t think of her,”

					 					Rejoin’d the Mago, “but on Bertha muse;

					 					For, by my choicest best barometer,

					 					You shall not throttled be in marriage noose;

					 					I’ve said it, Sire; you only have to choose

					 					Bertha or Bellanaine.” So saying, he drew

					 					From the left pocket of his threadbare hose,

					 					A sampler hoarded slyly, good as new;

					 					Holding it by his thumb and finger full in view.





L


				 					“Sire, this is Bertha Pearl’s neat handywork,

					 					Her name, see here, Midsummer, ninety-one’⁠—

					 					Elfinan snatch’d it with a sudden jerk,

					 					And wept as if he never would have done,

					 					Honouring with royal tears the poor homespun;

					 					Whereon were broider’d tigers with black eyes,

					 					And long-tailed pheasants, and a rising sun,

					 					Plenty of posies, great stags, butterflies

					 					Bigger than stags⁠—a moon⁠—with other mysteries.





LI


				 					The monarch handled o’er and o’er again

					 					These day-school hieroglyphics with a sigh;

					 					Somewhat in sadness, but pleased in the main,

					 					Till this oracular couplet met his eye

					 					Astounded⁠—Cupid, I do thee defy!

					 					It was too much. He shrunk back in his chair,

					 					Grew pale as death and fainted⁠—very nigh!

					 					“Pho! nonsense!” exclaim’d Hum, “now don’t despair:

					 					She does not mean it really. Cheer up, hearty⁠—there!





LII


				 					“And listen to my words. You say you won’t,

					 					On any terms, marry Miss Bellanaine;

					 					It goes against your conscience⁠—good! well, don’t.

					 					You say, you love a mortal. I would fain

					 					Persuade your honour’s highness to refrain

					 					From peccadilloes. But, Sire, as I say,

					 					What good would that do? And, to be more plain,

					 					You would do me a mischief some odd day,

					 					Cut off my ears and hands, or head too, by my fay!





LIII


				 					“Besides, manners forbid that I should pass any

					 					Vile strictures on the conduct of a prince

					 					Who should indulge his genius, if he has any,

					 					Not, like a subject, foolish matter mince.

					 					Now I think on ’t, perhaps I could convince

					 					Your Majesty there is no crime at all

					 					In loving pretty little Bertha, since

					 					She’s very delicate⁠—not over tall,⁠—

					 					A fairy’s hand, and in the waist why⁠—very small.”





LIV


				 					“Ring the repeater, gentle Hum!” “ ’Tis five,”

					 					Said gentle Hum; “the nights draw in apace;

					 					The little birds I hear are all alive;

					 					I see the dawning touch’d upon your face;

					 					Shall I put out the candles, please your Grace?”

					 					“Do put them out, and, without more ado,

					 					Tell me how I may that sweet girl embrace,⁠—

					 					How you can bring her to me.” “That’s for you,

					 					Great Emperor! to adventure, like a lover true.”





LV


				 					“I fetch her!”⁠—“Yes, an ’t like your Majesty;

					 					And as she would be frighten’d wide awake,

					 					To travel such a distance through the sky,

					 					Use of some soft manœuvre you must make,

					 					For your convenience, and her dear nerves’ sake;

					 					Nice way would be to bring her in a swoon,

					 					Anon, I’ll tell you what course were best to take;

					 					You must away this morning.” “Hum! so soon?”

					 					“Sire, you must be in Kent by twelve o’clock at noon.”





LVI


				 					At this great Caesar started on his feet,

					 					Lifted his wings, and stood attentivewise.

					 					Those wings to Canterbury you must beat,

					 					If you hold Bertha as a worthy prize,

					 					Look in the Almanack⁠—Moore never lies⁠—

					 					April the twenty-fourth⁠—this coming day,

					 					Now breathing its new bloom upon the skies,

					 					Will end in St. Mark’s Eve;⁠—you must away,

					 					For on that eve alone can you the maid convey.”





LVII


				 					Then the magician solemnly ’gan to frown,

					 					So that his frost-white eye-brows, beetling low,

					 					Shaded his deep green eyes, and wrinkles brown

					 					Plaited upon his furnace-scorched brow:

					 					Forth from his hood that hung his neck below

					 					He lifted a bright casket of pure gold,

					 					Touch’d a spring-lock, and there in wool or snow,

					 					Charm’d into ever freezing, lay an old

					 					And legend-leaved book, mysterious to behold.





LVIII


				 					“Take this same book⁠—it will not bite you, Sire;

					 					There, put it underneath your royal arm;

					 					Though it’s a pretty weight, it will not tire,

					 					But rather on your journey keep you warm:

					 					This is the magic, this the potent charm,

					 					That shall drive Bertha to a fainting fit!

					 					When the time comes, don’t feel the least alarm

					 					But lift her from the ground, and swiftly flit

					 					Back to your palace …





LIX


				 					“What shall I do with that same book?” “Why merely

					 					Lay it on Bertha’s table, close beside

					 					Her work-box, and ’twill help your purpose dearly;

					 					I say no more.” “Or good or ill betide,

					 					Through the wide air to Kent this morn I glide!”

					 					Exclaim’d the Emperor, “When I return,

					 					Ask what you will,⁠—I’ll give you my new bride!

					 					And take some more wine. Hum;⁠—O, Heavens! I burn

					 					To be upon the wing! Now, now, that minx I spurn!”





LX


				 					“Leave her to me,” rejoin’d the magian:

					 					“But how shall I account, illustrious fay!

					 					For thine imperial absence? Pho! I can

					 					Say you are very sick, and bar the way

					 					To your so loving courtiers for one day;

					 					If either of their two Archbishops’ graces

					 					Should talk of extreme unction, I shall say

					 					You do not like cold pig with Latin phrases,

					 					Which never should be used but in alarming cases.”





LXI


				 					“Open the window. Hum; I’m ready now!”

					 					“Zooks!” exclaim’d Hum, as up the sash he drew,

					 					“Behold, your Majesty, upon the brow

					 					Of yonder hill, what crowds of people!” “Whew!

					 					The monster’s always after something new,”

					 					Return’d his Highness, “they are piping hot

					 					To see my pigsney Bellanaine. Hum! do

					 					Tighten my belt a little,⁠—so, so,⁠—not

					 					Too tight,⁠—the book!⁠—my wand!⁠—so, nothing is forgot.”





LXII


				 					“Wounds! how they shout!” said Hum, “and there,⁠—see, see,

					 					Th’ ambassador’s return’d from Pigmio!

					 					The morning’s very fine,⁠—uncommonly!

					 					See, past the skirts of yon white cloud they go,

					 					Tinging it with soft crimsons! Now below

					 					The sable-pointed heads of firs and pines

					 					They dip, move on, and with them moves a glow

					 					Along the forest side! Now amber lines

					 					Reach the hill top, and now throughout the valley shines.”





LXIII


				 					“Why, Hum, you’re getting quite poetical!

					 					Those nows you managed in a special style.”

					 					“If ever you have leisure, Sire, you shall

					 					See scraps of mine will make it worth your while,

					 					Tit-bits for Phœbus!⁠—yes, you well may smile.

					 					Hark! hark! the bells!” “A little further yet,

					 					Good Hum, and let me view this mighty coil.”

					 					Then the great Emperor full graceful set

					 					His elbow for a prop, and snuff’d his mignonette.





LXIV


				 					The morn is full of holiday: loud bells

					 					With rival clamors ring from every spire;

					 					Cunningly-station’d music dies and swells

					 					In echoing places; when the winds respire,

					 					Light flags stream out like gauzy tongues of fire;

					 					A metropolitan murmur, lifeful, warm,

					 					Comes from the northern suburbs; rich attire

					 					Freckles with red and gold the moving swarm;

					 					While here and there clear trumpets blow a keen alarm.





LXV


				 					And now the fairy escort was seen clear,

					 					Like the old pageant of Aurora’s train,

					 					Above a pearl-built minster, hovering near;

					 					First wily Crafticant, the chamberlain,

					 					Balanced upon his gray-grown pinions twain,

					 					His slender wand officially reveal’d;

					 					Then black gnomes scattering sixpences like rain;

					 					Then pages three and three; and next, slave-held

					 					The Imaian ’scutcheon bright,⁠—one mouse in argent field.





LXVI


				 					Gentlemen pensioners next; and after them,

					 					A troop of winged Janizaries flew;

					 					Then slaves, as presents bearing many a gem;

					 					Then twelve physicians fluttering two and two;

					 					And next a chaplain in a cassock new;

					 					Then Lords in waiting; then (what head not reels

					 					For pleasure?)⁠—the fair Princess in full view,

					 					Borne upon wings,⁠—and very pleased she feels

					 					To have such splendour dance attendance at her heels.





LXVII


				 					For there was more magnificence behind:

					 					She waved her handkerchief. “Ah, very grand!”

					 					Cried Elfinan, and closed the window-blind;

					 					“And, Hum, we must not shilly-shally stand,⁠—

					 					Adieu! adieu! I’m off for Angle-land!

					 					I say, old Hocus, have you such a thing

					 					About you,⁠—feel your pockets, I command,⁠—

					 					I want, this instant, an invisible ring,⁠—

					 					Thank you, old mummy!⁠—now securely I take wing.”





LXVIII


				 					Then Elfinan swift vaulted from the floor,

					 					And lighted graceful on the window-sill;

					 					Under one arm the magic book he bore,

					 					The other he could wave about at will;

					 					Pale was his face, he still look’d very ill:

					 					He bow’d at Bellanaine, and said⁠—“Poor Bell!

					 					Farewell! farewell! and if for ever! still

					 					For ever fare thee well!”⁠—and then he fell

					 					A laughing!⁠—snapp’d his fingers!⁠—shame it is to tell!





LXIX


				 					“By ’r Lady! he is gone!” cries Hum, “and I,⁠—

					 					(I own it),⁠—have made too free with his wine;

					 					Old Crafticant will smoke me. By-the-bye!

					 					This room is full of jewels as a mine,⁠—

					 					Dear valuable creatures, how ye shine!

					 					Sometime to-day I must contrive a minute,

					 					If Mercury propitiously incline,

					 					To examine his scrutoire, and see what’s in it,

					 					For of superfluous diamonds I as well may thin it.





LXX


				 					“The Emperor’s horrid bad; yes, that’s my cue!”

					 					Some histories say that this was Hum’s last speech;

					 					That, being fuddled, he went reeling through

					 					The corridor, and scarce upright could reach

					 					The stair-head; that being glutted as a leech,

					 					And used, as we ourselves have just now said,

					 					To manage stairs reversely, like a peach

					 					Too ripe, he fell, being puzzled in his head

					 					With liquor and the staircase: verdict⁠—found stone dead.





LXXI


				 					This, as a falsehood, Crafticanto treats;

					 					And as his style is of strange elegance,

					 					Gentle and tender, full of soft conceits,

					 					(Much like our Boswell’s,) we will take a glance

					 					At his sweet prose, and, if we can, make dance

					 					His woven periods into careless rhyme;

					 					O, little faery Pegasus! rear⁠—prance⁠—

					 					Trot round the quarto⁠—ordinary time!

					 					March, little Pegasus, with pawing hoof sublime!





LXXII


				 					“Well, let us see⁠—tenth book and chapter nine,”⁠—

					 					Thus Crafticant pursues his diary:⁠—

					 					“ ’Twas twelve o’clock at night, the weather fine,

					 					Latitude thirty-six; our scouts descry

					 					A flight of starlings making rapidly

					 					Towards Thibet. Mem.:⁠—birds fly in the night;

					 					From twelve to half-past⁠—wings not fit to fly

					 					For a thick fog⁠—the Princess sulky quite:

					 					Call’d for an extra shawl, and gave her nurse a bite.





LXXIII


				 					“Five minutes before one⁠—brought down a moth

					 					With my new double-barrel⁠—stew’d the thighs,

					 					And made a very tolerable broth⁠—

					 					Princess turn’d dainty, to our great surprise,

					 					Alter’d her mind, and thought it very nice:

					 					Seeing her pleasant, tried her with a pun,

					 					She frown’d; a monstrous owl across us flies

					 					About this time,⁠—a sad old figure of fun;

					 					Bad omen⁠—this new match can’t be a happy one.





LXXIV


				 					“From two to half-past, dusky way we made,

					 					Above the plains of Gobi,⁠—desert, bleak;

					 					Beheld afar off, in the hooded shade

					 					Of darkness, a great mountain (strange to speak),

					 					Spitting, from forth its sulphur-baken peak,

					 					A fan-shaped burst of blood-red, arrowy fire,

					 					Turban’d with smoke, which still away did reek,

					 					Solid and black from that eternal pyre,

					 					Upon the laden winds that scantly could respire.





LXXV


				 					“Just upon three o’clock, a falling star

					 					Created an alarm among our troop,

					 					Kill’d a man-cook, a page, and broke a jar,

					 					A tureen, and three dishes, at one swoop,

					 					Then passing by the Princess, singed her hoop:

					 					Could not conceive what Coralline was at,

					 					She clapp’d her hands three times, and cried out ‘Whoop!’

					 					Some strange Imaian custom. A large bat

					 					Came sudden ’fore my face, and brush’d against my hat.





LXXVI


				 					“Five minutes thirteen seconds after three,

					 					Far in the west a mighty fire broke out,

					 					Conjectured, on the instant, it might be

					 					The city of Balk⁠—’twas Balk beyond all doubt:

					 					A griffin, wheeling here and there about,

					 					Kept reconnoitering us⁠—doubled our guard⁠—

					 					Lighted our torches, and kept up a shout,

					 					Till he sheer’d off⁠—the Princess very scared⁠—

					 					And many on their marrow-bones for death prepared.





LXXVII


				 					“At half-past three arose the cheerful moon⁠—

					 					Bivouack’d for four minutes on a cloud⁠—

					 					Where from the earth we heard a lively tune

					 					Of tambourines and pipes, severe and loud,

					 					While on a flowery lawn a brilliant crowd

					 					Cinque-parted danced, some half asleep reposed

					 					Beneath the green-faned cedars, some did shroud

					 					In silken tents, and ’mid light fragrance dozed,

					 					Or on the open turf their soothed eyelids closed.





LXXVIII


				 					“Dropp’d my gold watch, and kill’d a kettledrum⁠—

					 					It went for apoplexy⁠—foolish folks!⁠—

					 					Left it to pay the piper⁠—a good sum⁠—

					 					(I’ve got a conscience, maugre people’s jokes,)

					 					To scrape a little favour; ’gan to coax

					 					Her Highness’ pug-dog⁠—got a sharp rebuff⁠—

					 					She wish’d a game at whist⁠—made three revokes⁠—

					 					Turn’d from myself, her partner, in a huff;

					 					His Majesty will know her temper time enough.





LXXIX


				 					“She cried for chess⁠—I play’d a game with her⁠—

					 					Castled her king with such a vixen look,

					 					It bodes ill to his Majesty⁠—(refer

					 					To the second chapter of my fortieth book,

					 					And see what hoity-toity airs she took).

					 					At half-past four the morn essay’d to beam⁠—

					 					Saluted, as we pass’d, an early rook,⁠—

					 					The Princess fell asleep, and, in her dream,

					 					Talk’d of one Master Hubert, deep in her esteem.





LXXX


				 					“About this time⁠—making delightful way⁠—

					 					Shed a quill-feather from my larboard wing⁠—

					 					Wish’d, trusted, hoped ’twas no sign of decay⁠—

					 					Thank Heaven, I’m hearty yet!⁠—’twas no such thing:⁠—

					 					At five the golden light began to spring,

					 					With fiery shudder through the bloomed east;

					 					At six we heard Panthea’s churches ring⁠—

					 					The city all his unhived swarms had cast,

					 					To watch our grand approach, and hail us as we pass’d.





LXXXI


				 					“As flowers turn their faces to the sun,

					 					So on our flight with hungry eyes they gaze,

					 					And, as we shaped our course, this, that way run,

					 					With mad-cap pleasure, or hand-clasp’d amaze:

					 					Sweet in the air a mild-toned music plays,

					 					And progresses through its own labyrinth;

					 					Buds gather’d from the green spring’s middle-days,

					 					They scatter’d⁠—daisy, primrose, hyacinth⁠—

					 					Or round white columns wreathed from capital to plinth.





LXXXII


				 					“Onward we floated o’er the panting streets,

					 					That seem’d throughout with upheld faces paved;

					 					Look where we will, our bird’s-eye vision meets

					 					Legions of holiday; bright standards waved,

					 					And fluttering ensigns emulously craved

					 					Our minute’s glance; a busy thunderous roar,

					 					From square to square, among the buildings raved,

					 					As when the sea, at flow, gluts up once more

					 					The craggy hollowness of a wild-reefed shore.





LXXXIII


				 					“And ‘Bellanaine for ever!’ shouted they!

					 					While that fair Princess, from her winged chair,

					 					Bow’d low with high demeanour, and, to pay

					 					Their new-blown loyalty with guerdon fair,

					 					Still emptied, at meet distance, here and there,

					 					A plenty horn of jewels. And here I

					 					(Who wish to give the devil her due) declare

					 					Against that ugly piece of calumny,

					 					Which calls them Highland pebble-stones not worth a fly.





LXXXIV


				 					“Still ‘Bellanaine!’ they shouted, while we glide

					 					’Slant to a light Ionic portico,

					 					The city’s delicacy, and the pride

					 					Of our Imperial Basilic; a row

					 					Of lords and ladies, on each hand, make show

					 					Submissive of knee-bent obeisance,

					 					All down the steps; and, as we enter’d, lo!

					 					The strangest sight⁠—the most unlook’d-for chance⁠—

					 					All things turn’d topsy-turvy in a devil’s dance.





LXXXV


				 					“ ’Stead of his anxious Majesty and court

					 					At the open doors, with wide saluting eyes,

					 					Congées and scrape-graces of every sort,

					 					And all the smooth routine of gallantries,

					 					Was seen, to our immoderate surprise,

					 					A motley crowd thick gather’d in the hall,

					 					Lords, scullions, deputy-scullions, with wild cries

					 					Stunning the vestible from wall to wall,

					 					Where the Chief Justice on his knees and hands doth crawl.





LXXXVI


				 					“Counts of the palace, and the state purveyor

					 					Of moth’s-down, to make soft the royal beds,

					 					The Common Council and my fool Lord Mayor

					 					Marching a-row, each other slipshod treads;

					 					Powder’d bag-wigs and ruffy-tuffy heads

					 					Of cinder wenches meet and soil each other;

					 					Toe crush’d with heel ill-natured fighting breeds,

					 					Frill-rumpling elbows brew up many a bother,

					 					And fists in the short ribs keep up the yell and pother.





LXXXVII


				 					“A Poet, mounted on the Court-Clown’s back,

					 					Rode to the Princess swift with spurring heels,

					 					And close into her face, with rhyming clack,

					 					Began a Prothalamion;⁠—she reels,

					 					She falls, she faints!⁠—while laughter peals

					 					Over her woman’s weakness. ‘Where!’ cried I,

					 					‘Where is his Majesty?’ No person feels

					 					Inclined to answer; wherefore instantly

					 					I plunged into the crowd to find him or to die.





LXXXVIII


				 					“Jostling my way I gain’d the stairs, and ran

					 					To the first landing, where, incredible!

					 					I met, far gone in liquor, that old man,

					 					That vile impostor Hum,⁠⸺’

					 					So far so well,⁠—

					 					For we have proved the Mago never fell

					 					Down stairs on Crafticanto’s evidence;

					 					And therefore duly shall proceed to tell,

					 					Plain in our own original mood and tense,

					 					The sequel of this day, though labour ’tis immense!





				To George Keats 				Written in Sickness




			 				Brother, belov’d if health shall smile again,

				 				Upon this wasted form and fever’d cheek:

				 				If e’er returning vigour bid these weak

				 				And languid limbs their gladsome strength regain,

				 				Well may thy brow the placid glow retain

				 				Of sweet content and thy pleas’d eye may speak

				 				The conscious self applause, but should I seek

				 				To utter what this heart can feel,⁠—Ah! vain

				 				Were the attempt! Yet kindest friends while o’er

				 				My couch ye bend, and watch with tenderness

				 				The being whom your cares could e’en restore,

				 				From the cold grasp of Death, say can you guess

				 				The feelings which these lips can ne’er express?

				 				Feelings, deep fix’d in grateful memory’s store.





The Last Sonnet


			 				Bright star, would I were steadfast as thou art!

				 				Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night,

				 				And watching, with eternal lids apart,

				 				Like Nature’s patient sleepless Eremite,

				 				The moving waters at their priestlike task

				 				Of pure ablution round earth’s human shores

				 				Or gazing on the new soft fallen mask

				 				Of snow upon the mountains and the moors:

				 				No⁠—yet still steadfast, still unchangeable,

				 				Pillow’d upon my fair love’s ripening breast,

				 				To feel for ever its soft fall and swell,

				 				Awake for ever in a sweet unrest,

				 				Still, still to hear her tender-taken breath,

				 				And so live ever⁠—or else swoon to death.





Endnotes


			 				 					 						“Mr. Nisby is of opinion that laced coffee is bad for the head.”

						—Spectator.



					 						↩




				 					Cham is said to have been the inventor of magic. Lucy learnt this from Bayle’s Dictionary, and had copied a long Latin note from that work. ↩





				 				 			 			Poetry

			was compiled from poetry published between 1816 and 1820 by

			John Keats.

			This ebook was produced for the

			Standard Ebooks project

			by

			Robin Whittleton,

			and is based on digital scans available at the

			Internet Archive.

			The cover page is adapted from

			John Keats in His Study at Hampstead,

			a painting completed between 1821⁠–⁠1823 by

			Joseph Severn.

			The cover and title pages feature the

			League Spartan and Sorts Mill Goudy

			typefaces created in 2014 and 2009 by

			The League of Moveable Type.

			The first edition of this ebook was released on

			October 19, 2017, 9:59 p.m.

			You can check for updates to this ebook, view its revision history, or download it for different ereading systems at

			standardebooks.org/ebooks/john-keats/poetry.

			The volunteer-driven Standard Ebooks project relies on readers like you to submit typos, corrections, and other improvements. Anyone can contribute at standardebooks.org.





Uncopyright


			 				 					May you do good and not evil.

					 					May you find forgiveness for yourself and forgive others.

					 					May you share freely, never taking more than you give.





			Copyright pages exist to tell you can’t do something. Unlike them, this Uncopyright page exists to tell you, among other things, that the writing and artwork in this ebook are believed to be in the U.S. public domain. The U.S. public domain represents our collective cultural heritage, and items in it are free for anyone in the U.S. to do almost anything at all with, without having to get permission. Public domain items are free of copyright restrictions.

			Copyright laws are different around the world. If you’re not located in the U.S., check with your local laws before using this ebook.

			Non-authorship activities performed on public domain items⁠—so-called “sweat of the brow” work⁠—don’t create a new copyright. That means nobody can claim a new copyright on a public domain item for work like digitization, markup, or typography. Regardless, to dispel any possible doubt on the copyright status of this ebook, Standard Ebooks and its contributors release this ebook under the terms in the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication, thus dedicating to the worldwide public domain all of the work they’ve done on this ebook, including but not limited to metadata, the titlepage, imprint, colophon, this Uncopyright, and any changes or enhancements to, or markup on, the original text and artwork. This dedication doesn’t change the copyright status of the underlying works, which, though believed to already be in the U.S. public domain, may not yet be in the public domain of other countries. We make this dedication in the interest of enriching our global cultural heritage, to promote free and libre culture around the world, and to give back to the unrestricted culture that has given all of us so much.

			 				Standard Ebooks and its contributors offer this ebook as-is and make no representations or warranties of any kind concerning this ebook, express, implied, statutory or otherwise, including without limitation warranties of title, merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non infringement, or the absence of latent or other defects, accuracy, or the presence or absence of errors, whether or not discoverable, all to the greatest extent permissible under applicable law.





