				 				 			 			This ebook is the product of many hours of hard work by volunteers for Standard Ebooks, and builds on the hard work of other literature lovers made possible by the public domain.

			This particular ebook is based on a transcription produced for Project Gutenberg and on digital scans available at the HathiTrust Digital Library.

			The writing and artwork within are believed to be in the U.S. public domain, and Standard Ebooks releases this ebook edition under the terms in the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication. For full license information, see the Uncopyright at the end of this ebook.

			Standard Ebooks is a volunteer-driven project that produces ebook editions of public domain literature using modern typography, technology, and editorial standards, and distributes them free of cost. You can download this and other ebooks carefully produced for true book lovers at standardebooks.org.





The Persons of the Play


			 				 					Aubrey Tanqueray



				 					Paula



				 					Ellean



				 					Cayley Drummle



				 					Mrs. Cortelyon



				 					Captain Hugh Ardale



				 					Gordon Jayne, M.D.



				 					Frank Misquith, Q.C., M.P.



				 					Sir George Orreyed, Bart.



				 					Lady Orreyed



				 					Morse





			The Present Day.

			The Scene of the First Act is laid at Mr. Tanqueray’s rooms, No. 2x, The Albany, in the month of November; the occurrences of the succeeding Acts take place at his house, Highercoombe, near Willowmere, Surrey, during the early part of the following year.





The Second Mrs. Tanqueray





Act I


			Aubrey Tanqueray’s Chambers in the Albany⁠—a richly and tastefully decorated room, elegantly and luxuriously furnished: on the right a large pair of doors opening into another room, on the left at the further end of the room a small door leading to a bedchamber. A circular table is laid for a dinner for four persons which has now reached the stage of dessert and coffee. Everything in the apartment suggests wealth and refinement. The fire is burning brightly.

			 				 					 						 						 							Aubrey Tanqueray, Misquith, and Jayne are seated at the dinner table. Aubrey is forty-two, handsome, winning in manner, his speech and bearing retaining some of the qualities of young-manhood. Misquith is about forty-seven, genial and portly. Jayne is a year or two Misquith’s senior; soft-speaking and precise⁠—in appearance a type of the prosperous town physician. Morse, Aubrey’s servant, places a little cabinet of cigars and the spirit-lamp on the table beside Aubrey, and goes out.

					 						 Misquith 						 Aubrey, it is a pleasant yet dreadful fact to contemplate, but it’s nearly fifteen years since I first dined with you. You lodged in Piccadilly in those days, over a hat-shop. Jayne, I met you at that dinner, and Cayley Drummle.

					 						 Jayne 						 Yes, yes. What a pity it is that Cayley isn’t here tonight.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Confound the old gossip! His empty chair has been staring us in the face all through dinner. I ought to have told Morse to take it away.

					 						 Misquith 						 Odd, his sending no excuse.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I’ll walk round to his lodgings later on and ask after him.

					 						 Misquith 						 I’ll go with you.

					 						 Jayne 						 So will I.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Opening the cigar-cabinet. Doctor, it’s useless to tempt you, I know. Frank⁠—Misquith and Aubrey smoke. I particularly wished Cayley Drummle to be one of us tonight. You two fellows and Cayley are my closest, my best friends⁠—

					 						 Misquith 						 My dear Aubrey!

					 						 Jayne 						 I rejoice to hear you say so.

					 						 Aubrey 						 And I wanted to see the three of you round this table. You can’t guess the reason.

					 						 Misquith 						 You desired to give us a most excellent dinner.

					 						 Jayne 						 Obviously.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Hesitatingly. Well⁠—I⁠—Glancing at the clock⁠—Cayley won’t turn up now.

					 						 Jayne 						 H’m, hardly.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Then you two shall hear it. Doctor, Frank, this is the last time we are to meet in these rooms.

					 						 Jayne 						 The last time?

					 						 Misquith 						 You’re going to leave the Albany?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes. You’ve heard me speak of a house I built in the country years ago, haven’t you?

					 						 Misquith 						 In Surrey.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Well, when my wife died I cleared out of that house and let it. I think of trying the place again.

					 						 Misquith 						 But you’ll go raving mad if ever you find yourself down there alone.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ah, but I shan’t be alone, and that’s what I wanted to tell you. I’m going to be married.

					 						 Jayne 						 Going to be married?

					 						 Misquith 						 Married?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes⁠—tomorrow.

					 						 Jayne 						 Tomorrow?

					 						 Misquith 						 You take my breath away! My dear fellow, I⁠—I⁠—of course, I congratulate you.

					 						 Jayne 						 And⁠—and so do I⁠—heartily.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Thanks⁠—thanks.

					 						 						 							There is a moment or two of embarrassment.

					 						 Misquith 						 Er⁠—ah⁠—this is an excellent cigar.

					 						 Jayne 						 Ah⁠—um⁠—your coffee is remarkable.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Look here; I daresay you two old friends think this treatment very strange, very unkind. So I want you to understand me. You know a marriage often cools friendships. What’s the usual course of things? A man’s engagement is given out, he is congratulated, complimented upon his choice; the church is filled with troops of friends, and he goes away happily to a chorus of good wishes. He comes back, sets up house in town or country, and thinks to resume the old associations, the old companionships. My dear Frank, my dear good doctor, it’s very seldom that it can be done. Generally, a worm has begun to eat its way into those hearty, unreserved, prenuptial friendships; a damnable constraint sets in and acts like a wasting disease; and so, believe me, in nine cases out of ten a man’s marriage severs for him more close ties than it forms.

					 						 Misquith 						 Well, my dear Aubrey, I earnestly hope⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 I know what you’re going to say, Frank. I hope so, too. In the meantime let’s face dangers. I’ve reminded you of the usual course of things, but my marriage isn’t even the conventional sort of marriage likely to satisfy society. Now, Cayley’s a bachelor, but you two men have wives. By-the-by, my love to Mrs. Misquith and to Mrs. Jayne when you get home⁠—don’t forget that. Well, your wives may not⁠—like⁠—the lady I’m going to marry.

					 						 Jayne 						 Aubrey, forgive me for suggesting that the lady you are going to marry may not like our wives⁠—mine at least; I beg your pardon, Frank.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Quite so; then I must go the way my wife goes.

					 						 Misquith 						 Come, come, pray don’t let us anticipate that either side will be called upon to make such a sacrifice.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes, yes, let us anticipate it. And let us make up our minds to have no slow bleeding-to-death of our friendship. We’ll end a pleasant chapter here tonight, and after tonight start afresh. When my wife and I settle down at Willowmere it’s possible that we shall all come together. But if this isn’t to be, for Heaven’s sake let us recognise that it is simply because it can’t be, and not wear hypocritical faces and suffer and be wretched. Doctor, Frank⁠—Holding out his hands, one to Misquith, the other to Jayne⁠—good luck to all of us!

					 						 Misquith 						 But⁠—but⁠—do I understand we are to ask nothing? Not even the lady’s name, Aubrey?

					 						 Aubrey 						 The lady, my dear Frank, belongs to the next chapter, and in that her name is Mrs. Aubrey Tanqueray.

					 						 Jayne 						 Raising his coffee cup. Then, in an old-fashioned way, I propose a toast. Aubrey, Frank, I give you “The Next Chapter!”

					 						 						 							They drink the toast, saying, “The Next Chapter!”

					 						 Aubrey 						 Doctor, find a comfortable chair; Frank, you too. As we’re going to turn out by-and-by, let me scribble a couple of notes now while I think of them.

					 						 Misquith and Jayne 						 Certainly⁠—yes, yes.

					 						 Aubrey 						 It might slip my memory when I get back.

					 						 						 							Aubrey sits at a writing-table at the other end of the room, and writes.

					 						 Jayne 						 To Misquith, in a whisper. Frank⁠—Misquith quietly leaves his chair and sits nearer to Jayne. What is all this? Simply a morbid crank of Aubrey’s with regard to ante-nuptial acquaintances?

					 						 Misquith 						 H’m! Did you notice one expression he used?

					 						 Jayne 						 Let me think⁠—

					 						 Misquith 						 “My marriage is not even the conventional sort of marriage likely to satisfy society.”

					 						 Jayne 						 Bless me, yes! What does that suggest?

					 						 Misquith 						 That he has a particular rather than a general reason for anticipating estrangement from his friends, I’m afraid.

					 						 Jayne 						 A horrible mésalliance! A dairymaid who has given him a glass of milk during a day’s hunting, or a little anemic shopgirl! Frank, I’m utterly wretched!

					 						 Misquith 						 My dear Jayne, speaking in absolute confidence, I have never been more profoundly depressed in my life.

					 						 						 							Morse enters.

					 						 Morse 						 Announcing. Mr. Drummle.

					 						 						 							Cayley Drummle enters briskly. He is a neat little man of about five-and-forty, in manner bright, airy, debonair, but with an undercurrent of seriousness.

					 						 						 							Morse retires.

					 						 Drummle 						 I’m in disgrace; nobody realises that more thoroughly than I do. Where’s my host?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Who has risen. Cayley.

					 						 Drummle 						 Shaking hands with him. Don’t speak to me till I have tendered my explanation. A harsh word from anybody would unman me.

					 						 						 							Misquith and Jayne shake hands with Drummle.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Have you dined?

					 						 Drummle 						 No⁠—unless you call a bit of fish, a cutlet, and a pancake dining.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Cayley, this is disgraceful.

					 						 Jayne 						 Fish, a cutlet, and a pancake will require a great deal of explanation.

					 						 Misquith 						 Especially the pancake. My dear friend, your case looks miserably weak.

					 						 Drummle 						 Hear me! hear me!

					 						 Jayne 						 Now then!

					 						 Misquith 						 Come!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Well!

					 						 Drummle 						 It so happens that tonight I was exceptionally early in dressing for dinner.

					 						 Misquith 						 For which dinner⁠—the fish and cutlet?

					 						 Drummle 						 For this dinner, of course⁠—really, Frank! At a quarter to eight, in fact, I found myself trimming my nails, with ten minutes to spare. Just then enter my man with a note⁠—would I hasten, as fast as cab could carry me, to old Lady Orreyed in Bruton Street?⁠—“sad trouble.” Now, recollect, please, I had ten minutes on my hands, old Lady Orreyed was a very dear friend of my mother’s, and was in some distress.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Cayley, come to the fish and cutlet?

					 						 Misquith and Jayne 						 Yes, yes, and the pancake!

					 						 Drummle 						 Upon my word! Well, the scene in Bruton Street beggars description; the women servants looked scared, the men drunk; and there was poor old Lady Orreyed on the floor of her boudoir like Queen Bess among her pillows.

					 						 Aubrey 						 What’s the matter?

					 						 Drummle 						 To everybody. You know George Orreyed?

					 						 Misquith 						 Yes.

					 						 Jayne 						 I’ve met him.

					 						 Drummle 						 Well, he’s a thing of the past.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Not dead!

					 						 Drummle 						 Certainly, in the worst sense. He’s married Mabel Hervey.

					 						 Misquith 						 What!

					 						 Drummle 						 It’s true⁠—this morning. The poor mother showed me his letter⁠—a dozen curt words, and some of those ill-spelt.

					 						 Misquith 						 Walking up to the fireplace. I’m very sorry.

					 						 Jayne 						 Pardon my ignorance⁠—who was Mabel Hervey?

					 						 Drummle 						 You don’t⁠—? Oh, of course not. Miss Hervey⁠—Lady Orreyed, as she now is⁠—was a lady who would have been, perhaps has been, described in the reports of the Police or the Divorce Court as an actress. Had she belonged to a lower stratum of our advanced civilisation she would, in the event of judicial inquiry, have defined her calling with equal justification as that of a dressmaker. To do her justice, she is a type of a class which is immortal. Physically, by the strange caprice of creation, curiously beautiful; mentally, she lacks even the strength of deliberate viciousness. Paint her portrait, it would symbolise a creature perfectly patrician; lance a vein of her superbly-modelled arm, you would get the poorest vin ordinaire! Her affections, emotions, impulses, her very existence⁠—a burlesque! Flaxen, five-and-twenty, and feebly frolicsome; anybody’s, in less gentle society I should say everybody’s, property! That, doctor, was Miss Hervey who is the new Lady Orreyed. Dost thou like the picture?

					 						 Misquith 						 Very good, Cayley! Bravo!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Laying his hand on Drummle’s shoulder. You’d scarcely believe it, Jayne, but none of us really know anything about this lady, our gay young friend here, I suspect, least of all.

					 						 Drummle 						 Aubrey, I applaud your chivalry.

					 						 Aubrey 						 And perhaps you’ll let me finish a couple of letters which Frank and Jayne have given me leave to write. Returning to the writing-table. Ring for what you want, like a good fellow!

					 						 						 							Aubrey resumes his writing.

					 						 Misquith 						 To Drummle. Still, the fish and cutlet remain unexplained.

					 						 Drummle 						 Oh, the poor old woman was so weak that I insisted upon her taking some food, and felt there was nothing for it but to sit down opposite her. The fool! the blackguard!

					 						 Misquith 						 Poor Orreyed! Well, he’s gone under for a time.

					 						 Drummle 						 For a time! My dear Frank, I tell you he has absolutely ceased to be. Aubrey, who has been writing busily, turns his head towards the speakers and listens. His lips are set, and there is a frown upon his face. For all practical purposes you may regard him as the late George Orreyed. Tomorrow the very characteristics of his speech, as we remember them, will have become obsolete.

					 						 Jayne 						 But surely, in the course of years, he and his wife will outlive⁠—

					 						 Drummle 						 No, no, doctor, don’t try to upset one of my settled beliefs. You may dive into many waters, but there is one social Dead Sea⁠—!

					 						 Jayne 						 Perhaps you’re right.

					 						 Drummle 						 Right! Good God! I wish you could prove me otherwise! Why, for years I’ve been sitting, and watching and waiting.

					 						 Misquith 						 You’re in form tonight, Cayley. May we ask where you’ve been in the habit of squandering your useful leisure?

					 						 Drummle 						 Where? On the shore of that same sea.

					 						 Misquith 						 And, pray, what have you been waiting for?

					 						 Drummle 						 For some of my best friends to come up. Aubrey utters a half-stifled exclamation of impatience; then he hurriedly gathers up his papers from the writing-table. The three men turn to him. Eh?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Oh, I⁠—I’ll finish my letters in the other room if you’ll excuse me for five minutes. Tell Cayley the news.

					 						 						 							He goes out.

					 						 Drummle 						 Hurrying to the door. My dear fellow, my jabbering has disturbed you! I’ll never talk again as long as I live!

					 						 Misquith 						 Close the door, Cayley.

					 						 						 							Drummle shuts the door.

					 						 Jayne 						 Cayley⁠—

					 						 Drummle 						 Advancing to the dinner table. A smoke, a smoke, or I perish!

					 						 						 							Selects a cigar from the little cabinet.

					 						 Jayne 						 Cayley, marriages are in the air.

					 						 Drummle 						 Are they? Discover the bacillus, doctor, and destroy it.

					 						 Jayne 						 I mean, among our friends.

					 						 Drummle 						 Oh, Nugent Warrinder’s engagement to Lady Alice Tring. I’ve heard of that. They’re not to be married till the spring.

					 						 Jayne 						 Another marriage that concerns us a little takes place tomorrow.

					 						 Drummle 						 Whose marriage?

					 						 Jayne 						 Aubrey’s.

					 						 Drummle 						 Aub⁠—! Looking towards Misquith. Is it a joke?

					 						 Misquith 						 No.

					 						 Drummle 						 Looking from Misquith to Jayne. To whom?

					 						 Misquith 						 He doesn’t tell us.

					 						 Jayne 						 We three were asked here tonight to receive the announcement. Aubrey has some theory that marriage is likely to alienate a man from his friends, and it seems to me he has taken the precaution to wish us goodbye.

					 						 Misquith 						 No, no.

					 						 Jayne 						 Practically, surely.

					 						 Drummle 						 Thoughtfully. Marriage in general, does he mean, or this marriage?

					 						 Jayne 						 That’s the point. Frank says⁠—

					 						 Misquith 						 No, no, no; I feared it suggested⁠—

					 						 Jayne 						 Well, well. To Drummle. What do you think of it?

					 						 Drummle 						 After a slight pause. Is there a light there? Lighting his cigar. He⁠—wraps the lady⁠—in mystery⁠—you say?

					 						 Misquith 						 Most modestly.

					 						 Drummle 						 Aubrey’s⁠—not⁠—a very⁠—young man.

					 						 Jayne 						 Forty-three.

					 						 Drummle 						 Ah! L’age critique!

					 						 Misquith 						 A dangerous age⁠—yes, yes.

					 						 Drummle 						 When you two fellows go home, do you mind leaving me behind here?

					 						 Misquith 						 Not at all.

					 						 Jayne 						 By all means.

					 						 Drummle 						 All right. Anxiously. Deuce take it, the man’s second marriage mustn’t be another mistake!

					 						 						 							With his head bent he walks up to the fireplace.

					 						 Jayne 						 You knew him in his short married life, Cayley. Terribly unsatisfactory, wasn’t it?

					 						 Drummle 						 Well⁠—Looking at the door. I quite closed that door?

					 						 Misquith 						 Yes.

					 						 						 							Settles himself on the sofa; Jayne is seated in an armchair.

					 						 Drummle 						 Smoking, with his back to the fire. He married a Miss Herriott; that was in the year eighteen⁠—confound dates⁠—twenty years ago. She was a lovely creature⁠—by Jove, she was; by religion a Roman Catholic. She was one of your cold sort, you know⁠—all marble arms and black velvet. I remember her with painful distinctness as the only woman who ever made me nervous.

					 						 Misquith 						 Ha, ha!

					 						 Drummle 						 He loved her⁠—to distraction, as they say. Jupiter, how fervently that poor devil courted her! But I don’t believe she allowed him even to squeeze her fingers. She was an iceberg! As for kissing, the mere contact would have given him chapped lips. However, he married her and took her away, the latter greatly to my relief.

					 						 Jayne 						 Abroad, you mean?

					 						 Drummle 						 Eh? Yes. I imagine he gratified her by renting a villa in Lapland, but I don’t know. After a while they returned, and then I saw how woefully Aubrey had miscalculated results.

					 						 Jayne 						 Miscalculated⁠—?

					 						 Drummle 						 He had reckoned, poor wretch, that in the early days of marriage she would thaw. But she didn’t. I used to picture him closing his doors and making up the fire in the hope of seeing her features relax. Bless her, the thaw never set in! I believe she kept a thermometer in her stays and always registered ten degrees below zero. However, in time a child came⁠—a daughter.

					 						 Jayne 						 Didn’t that⁠—?

					 						 Drummle 						 Not a bit of it; it made matters worse. Frightened at her failure to stir up in him some sympathetic religious belief, she determined upon strong measures with regard to the child. He opposed her for a miserable year or so, but she wore him down, and the insensible little brat was placed in a convent, first in France, then in Ireland. Not long afterwards the mother died, strangely enough, of fever, the only warmth, I believe, that ever came to that woman’s body.

					 						 Misquith 						 Don’t, Cayley!

					 						 Jayne 						 The child is living, we know.

					 						 Drummle 						 Yes, if you choose to call it living. Miss Tanqueray⁠—a young woman of nineteen now⁠—is in the Loretto convent at Armagh. She professes to have found her true vocation in a religious life, and within a month or two will take final vows.

					 						 Misquith 						 He ought to have removed his daughter from the convent when the mother died.

					 						 Drummle 						 Yes, yes, but absolutely at the end there was reconciliation between husband and wife, and she won his promise that the child should complete her conventual education. He reaped his reward. When he attempted to gain his girl’s confidence and affection he was too late; he found he was dealing with the spirit of the mother. You remember his visit to Ireland last month?

					 						 Jayne 						 Yes.

					 						 Drummle 						 That was to wish his girl goodbye.

					 						 Misquith 						 Poor fellow?

					 						 Drummle 						 He sent for me when he came back. I think he must have had a lingering hope that the girl would relent⁠—would come to life, as it were⁠—at the last moment, for, for an hour or so, in this room, he was terribly shaken. I’m sure he’d clung to that hope from the persistent way in which he kept breaking off in his talk to repeat one dismal word, as if he couldn’t realise his position without dinning this damned word into his head.

					 						 Jayne 						 What word was that?

					 						 Drummle 						 Alone⁠—alone.

					 						 						 							Aubrey enters.

					 						 Aubrey 						 A thousand apologies!

					 						 Drummle 						 Gaily. We are talking about you, my dear Aubrey.

					 						 						 							During the telling of the story, Misquith has risen and gone to the fire, and Drummle has thrown himself full-length on the sofa. Aubrey now joins Misquith and Jayne.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Well, Cayley, are you surprised?

					 						 Drummle 						 Surp⁠—! I haven’t been surprised for twenty years.

					 						 Aubrey 						 And you’re not angry with me?

					 						 Drummle 						 Angry! Rising. Because you considerately withhold the name of a lady with whom it is now the object of my life to become acquainted? My dear fellow, you pique my curiosity, you give zest to my existence! And as for a wedding, who on earth wants to attend that familiar and probably draughty function? Ugh! My cigar’s out.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Let’s talk about something else.

					 						 Misquith 						 Looking at his watch. Not tonight, Aubrey.

					 						 Aubrey 						 My dear Frank!

					 						 Misquith 						 I go up to Scotland tomorrow, and there are some little matters⁠—

					 						 Jayne 						 I am off too.

					 						 Aubrey 						 No, no.

					 						 Jayne 						 I must: I have to give a look to a case in Clifford Street on my way home.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Going to the door. Well! Misquith and Jayne exchange looks with Drummle. Opening the door and calling. Morse, hats and coats! I shall write to you all next week from Genoa or Florence. Now, doctor, Frank, remember, my love to Mrs. Misquith and to Mrs. Jayne!

					 						 						 							Morse enters with hats and coats.

					 						 Misquith and Jayne 						 Yes, yes⁠—yes, yes.

					 						 Aubrey 						 And your young people!

					 						 						 							As Misquith and Jayne put on their coats there is the clatter of careless talk.

					 						 Jayne 						 Cayley, I meet you at dinner on Sunday.

					 						 Drummle 						 At the Stratfields’. That’s very pleasant.

					 						 Misquith 						 Putting on his coat with Aubrey’s aid. Ah-h!

					 						 Aubrey 						 What’s wrong?

					 						 Misquith 						 A twinge. Why didn’t I go to Aix in August?

					 						 Jayne 						 Shaking hands with Drummle. Good night, Cayley.

					 						 Drummle 						 Good night, my dear doctor!

					 						 Misquith 						 Shaking hands with Drummle. Cayley, are you in town for long?

					 						 Drummle 						 Dear friend, I’m nowhere for long. Good night.

					 						 Misquith 						 Good night.

					 						 						 							Aubrey, Jayne, and Misquith go out, followed by Morse; the hum of talk is continued outside.

					 						 Aubrey 						 A cigar, Frank?

					 						 Misquith 						 No, thank you.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Going to walk, doctor?

					 						 Jayne 						 If Frank will.

					 						 Misquith 						 By all means.

					 						 Aubrey 						 It’s a cold night.

					 						 						 							The door is closed. Drummle remains standing with his coat on his arm and his hat in his hand.

					 						 Drummle 						 To himself, thoughtfully. Now then! What the devil⁠—!

					 						 						 							Aubrey returns.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Eyeing Drummle a little awkwardly. Well, Cayley?

					 						 Drummle 						 Well, Aubrey?

					 						 						 							Aubrey walks up to the fire and stands looking into it.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You’re not going, old chap?

					 						 Drummle 						 Sitting. No.

					 						 Aubrey 						 After a slight pause, with a forced laugh. Hah! Cayley, I never thought I should feel⁠—shy⁠—with you.

					 						 Drummle 						 Why do you?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Never mind.

					 						 Drummle 						 Now, I can quite understand a man wishing to be married in the dark, as it were.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You can?

					 						 Drummle 						 In your place I should very likely adopt the same course.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You think so?

					 						 Drummle 						 And if I intended marrying a lady not prominently in Society, as I presume you do⁠—as I presume you do⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 Well?

					 						 Drummle 						 As I presume you do, I’m not sure that I should tender her for preliminary dissection at afternoon tea-tables.

					 						 Aubrey 						 No?

					 						 Drummle 						 In fact, there is probably only one person⁠—were I in your position tonight⁠—with whom I should care to chat the matter over.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Who’s that?

					 						 Drummle 						 Yourself, of course. Going to Aubrey and standing beside him. Of course, yourself, old friend.

					 						 Aubrey 						 After a pause. I must seem a brute to you, Cayley. But there are some acts which are hard to explain, hard to defend⁠—

					 						 Drummle 						 To defend⁠—?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Some acts which one must trust to time to put right.

					 						 						 							Drummle watches him for a moment, then takes up his hat and coat.

					 						 Drummle 						 Well, I’ll be moving.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Cayley! Confound you and your old friendship! Do you think I forget it? Put your coat down! Why did you stay behind here? Cayley, the lady I am going to marry is the lady⁠—who is known as⁠—Mrs. Jarman.

					 						 						 							There is a pause.

					 						 Drummle 						 In a low voice. Mrs. Jarman! are you serious?

					 						 						 							He walks up to the fireplace, where he leans upon the mantelpiece uttering something like a groan.

					 						 Aubrey 						 As you’ve got this out of me I give you leave to say all you care to say. Come, we’ll be plain with each other. You know Mrs. Jarman?

					 						 Drummle 						 I first met her at⁠—what does it matter?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes, yes, everything! Come!

					 						 Drummle 						 I met her at Homburg, two⁠—three seasons ago.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Not as Mrs. Jarman?

					 						 Drummle 						 No.

					 						 Aubrey 						 She was then⁠—?

					 						 Drummle 						 Mrs. Dartry.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes. She has also seen you in London, she says.

					 						 Drummle 						 Certainly.

					 						 Aubrey 						 In Aldford Street. Go on.

					 						 Drummle 						 Please!

					 						 Aubrey 						 I insist.

					 						 Drummle 						 With a slight shrug of the shoulders. Some time last year I was asked by a man to sup at his house, one night after the theatre.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Mr. Selwyn Ethurst⁠—a bachelor.

					 						 Drummle 						 Yes.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You were surprised therefore to find Mr. Ethurst aided in his cursed hospitality by a lady.

					 						 Drummle 						 I was unprepared.

					 						 Aubrey 						 The lady you had known as Mrs. Dartry? Drummle inclines his head silently. There is something of a yachting cruise in the Mediterranean too, is there not?

					 						 Drummle 						 I joined Peter Jarman’s yacht at Marseilles, in the Spring, a month before he died.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Mrs. Jarman was on board?

					 						 Drummle 						 She was a kind hostess.

					 						 Aubrey 						 And an old acquaintance?

					 						 Drummle 						 Yes.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You have told your story.

					 						 Drummle 						 With your assistance.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I have put you to the pain of telling it to show you that this is not the case of a blind man entrapped by an artful woman. Let me add that Mrs. Jarman has no legal right to that name, that she is simply Miss Ray⁠—Miss Paula Ray.

					 						 Drummle 						 After a pause. I should like to express my regret, Aubrey, for the way in which I spoke of George Orreyed’s marriage.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You mean you compare Lady Orreyed with Miss Ray? Drummle is silent. Oh, of course! To you, Cayley, all women who have been roughly treated, and who dare to survive by borrowing a little of our philosophy, are alike. You see in the crowd of the ill-used only one pattern; you can’t detect the shades of goodness, intelligence, even nobility there. Well, how should you? The crowd is dimly lighted! And, besides, yours is the way of the world.

					 						 Drummle 						 My dear Aubrey, I live in the world.

					 						 Aubrey 						 The name we give our little parish of St. James’s.

					 						 Drummle 						 Laying a hand on Aubrey’s shoulder. And you are quite prepared, my friend, to forfeit the esteem of your little parish?

					 						 Aubrey 						 I avoid mortification by shifting from one parish to another. I give up Pall Mall for the Surrey hills; leave off varnishing my boots and double the thickness of the soles.

					 						 Drummle 						 And your skin⁠—do you double the thickness of that also?

					 						 Aubrey 						 I know you think me a fool, Cayley⁠—you needn’t infer that I’m a coward into the bargain. No! I know what I’m doing, and I do it deliberately, defiantly. I’m alone; I injure no living soul by the step I’m going to take; and so you can’t urge the one argument which might restrain me. Of course, I don’t expect you to think compassionately, fairly even, of the woman whom I⁠—whom I am drawn to⁠—

					 						 Drummle 						 My dear Aubrey, I assure you I consider Mrs.⁠—Miss Jarman⁠—Mrs. Ray⁠—Miss Ray⁠—delightful. But I confess there is a form of chivalry which I gravely distrust, especially in a man of⁠—our age.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Thanks. I’ve heard you say that from forty till fifty a man is at heart either a stoic or a satyr.

					 						 Drummle 						 Protestingly. Ah! now⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 I am neither. I have a temperate, honourable affection for Mrs. Jarman. She has never met a man who has treated her well⁠—I intend to treat her well. That’s all. And in a few years, Cayley, if you’ve not quite forsaken me, I’ll prove to you that it’s possible to rear a life of happiness, of good repute, on a⁠—miserable foundation.

					 						 Drummle 						 Offering his hand. Do prove it!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Taking his hand. We have spoken too freely of⁠—of Mrs. Jarman. I was excited⁠—angry. Please forget it!

					 						 Drummle 						 My dear Aubrey, when we next meet I shall remember nothing but my respect for the lady who bears your name.

					 						 						 							Morse enters, closing the door behind him carefully.

					 						 Aubrey 						 What is it?

					 						 Morse 						 Hesitatingly. May I speak to you, Sir? In an undertone. Mrs. Jarman, sir.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Softly to Morse. Mrs. Jarman! Do you mean she is at the lodge in her carriage?

					 						 Morse 						 No, sir⁠—here. Aubrey looks towards Drummle, perplexed. There’s a nice fire in your⁠—in that room, sir. Glancing in the direction of the door leading to the bedroom.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Between his teeth, angrily. Very well.

					 						 						 							Morse retires.

					 						 Drummle 						 Looking at his watch. A quarter to eleven⁠—horrible! Taking up his hat and coat. Must get to bed⁠—up late every night this week. Aubrey assists Drummle with his coat. Thank you. Well, good night, Aubrey. I feel I’ve been dooced serious, quite out of keeping with myself; pray overlook it.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Kindly. Ah, Cayley!

					 						 Drummle 						 Putting on a neck-handkerchief. And remember that, after all, I’m merely a spectator in life; nothing more than a man at a play, in fact; only, like the old-fashioned playgoer, I love to see certain characters happy and comfortable at the finish. You understand?

					 						 Aubrey 						 I think I do.

					 						 Drummle 						 Then, for as long as you can, old friend, will you⁠—keep a stall for me?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes, Cayley.

					 						 Drummle 						 Gaily. Ah, ha! Good night! Bustling to the door. Don’t bother! I’ll let myself out! Good night! God bless yer!

					 						 						 							He goes out; Aubrey follows him. Morse enters by the other door, carrying some unopened letters which after a little consideration he places on the mantelpiece against the clock. Aubrey returns.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes?

					 						 Morse 						 You hadn’t seen your letters that came by the nine o’clock post, sir; I’ve put ’em where they’ll catch your eye by-and-by.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Thank you.

					 						 Morse 						 Hesitatingly. Gunter’s cook and waiter have gone, sir. Would you prefer me to go to bed?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Frowning. Certainly not.

					 						 Morse 						 Very well, sir.

					 						 						 							He goes out.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Opening the upper door. Paula! Paula!

					 						 						 							Paula enters and throws her arms round his neck. She is a young woman of about twenty-seven: beautiful, fresh, innocent-looking. She is in superb evening dress.

					 						 Paula 						 Dearest!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Why have you come here?

					 						 Paula 						 Angry?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes⁠—no. But it’s eleven o’clock.

					 						 Paula 						 Laughing. I know.

					 						 Aubrey 						 What on earth will Morse think?

					 						 Paula 						 Do you trouble yourself about what servants think?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Of course.

					 						 Paula 						 Goose! They’re only machines made to wait upon people⁠—and to give evidence in the Divorce Court. Looking round. Oh, indeed! A snug little dinner!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Three men.

					 						 Paula 						 Suspiciously. Men?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Men.

					 						 Paula 						 Penitently. Ah! Sitting at the table. I’m so hungry.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Let me get you some game pie, or some⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 No, no, hungry for this. What beautiful fruit! I love fruit when it’s expensive. He clears a space on the table, places a plate before her, and helps her to fruit. I haven’t dined, Aubrey dear.

					 						 Aubrey 						 My poor girl! Why?

					 						 Paula 						 In the first place, I forgot to order any dinner, and my cook, who has always loathed me, thought he’d pay me out before he departed.

					 						 Aubrey 						 The beast!

					 						 Paula 						 That’s precisely what I⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 No, Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 What I told my maid to call him. What next will you think of me?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Forgive me. You must be starved.

					 						 Paula 						 Eating fruit. I didn’t care. As there was nothing to eat, I sat in my best frock, with my toes on the dining-room fender, and dreamt, oh, such a lovely dinner-party.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Dear lonely little woman!

					 						 Paula 						 It was perfect. I saw you at the end of a very long table, opposite me, and we exchanged sly glances now and again over the flowers. We were host and hostess, Aubrey, and had been married about five years.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Kissing her hand. Five years.

					 						 Paula 						 And on each side of us was the nicest set imaginable⁠—you know, dearest, the sort of men and women that can’t be imitated.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes, yes. Eat some more fruit.

					 						 Paula 						 But I haven’t told you the best part of my dream.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Tell me.

					 						 Paula 						 Well, although we had been married only such a few years, I seemed to know by the look on their faces that none of our guests had ever heard anything⁠—anything⁠—anything peculiar about the fascinating hostess.

					 						 Aubrey 						 That’s just how it will be, Paula. The world moves so quickly. That’s just how it will be.

					 						 Paula 						 With a little grimace. I wonder! Glancing at the fire. Ugh! do throw another log on.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Mending the fire. There. But you mustn’t be here long.

					 						 Paula 						 Hospitable wretch! I’ve something important to tell you. No, stay where you are. Turning from him, her face averted. Look here, that was my dream, Aubrey; but the fire went out while I was dozing, and I woke up with a regular fit of the shivers. And the result of it all was that I ran upstairs and scribbled you a letter.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Dear baby!

					 						 Paula 						 Remain where you are. Taking a letter from her pocket. This is it. I’ve given you an account of myself, furnished you with a list of my adventures since I⁠—you know. Weighing the letter in her hand. I wonder if it would go for a penny. Most of it you’re acquainted with; I’ve told you a good deal, haven’t I?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Oh, Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 What I haven’t told you I daresay you’ve heard from others. But in case they’ve omitted anything⁠—the dears⁠—it’s all here.

					 						 Aubrey 						 In Heaven’s name, why must you talk like this tonight?

					 						 Paula 						 It may save discussion by-and-by, don’t you think? Holding out the letter. There you are.

					 						 Aubrey 						 No, dear, no.

					 						 Paula 						 Take it. He takes the letter. Read it through after I’ve gone, and then⁠—read it again, and turn the matter over in your mind finally. And if, even at the very last moment, you feel you⁠—oughtn’t to go to church with me, send a messenger to Pont Street, any time before eleven tomorrow, telling me that you’re afraid, and I⁠—I’ll take the blow.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Why, what⁠—what do you think I am?

					 						 Paula 						 That’s it. It’s because I know you’re such a dear good fellow that I want to save you the chance of ever feeling sorry you married me. I really love you so much, Aubrey, that to save you that I’d rather you treated me as⁠—as the others have done.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Turning from her with a cry. Oh!

					 						 Paula 						 After a slight pause. I suppose I’ve shocked you. I can’t help it if I have.

					 						 						 							She sits, with assumed languor and indifference. He turns to her, advances, and kneels by her.

					 						 Aubrey 						 My dearest, you don’t understand me. I⁠—I can’t bear to hear you always talking about⁠—what’s done with. I tell you I’ll never remember it; Paula, can’t you dismiss it? Try. Darling, if we promise each other to forget, to forget, we’re bound to be happy. After all, it’s a mechanical matter; the moment a wretched thought enters your head, you quickly think of something bright⁠—it depends on one’s will. Shall I burn this, dear? Referring to the letter he holds in his hand. Let me, let me!

					 						 Paula 						 With a shrug of the shoulders. I don’t suppose there’s much that’s new to you in it⁠—just as you like.

					 						 						 							He goes to the fire and burns the letter.

					 						 Aubrey 						 There’s an end of it. Returning to her. What’s the matter?

					 						 Paula 						 Rising, coldly. Oh, nothing! I’ll go and put my cloak on.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Detaining her. What is the matter?

					 						 Paula 						 Well, I think you might have said, “You’re very generous, Paula,” or at least, “Thank you, dear,” when I offered to set you free.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Catching her in his arms. Ah!

					 						 Paula 						 Ah! ah! Ha, ha! It’s all very well, but you don’t know what it cost me to make such an offer. I do so want to be married.

					 						 Aubrey 						 But you never imagined⁠—?

					 						 Paula 						 Perhaps not. And yet I did think of what I’d do at the end of our acquaintance if you had preferred to behave like the rest.

					 						 						 							Taking a flower from her bodice.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Hush!

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, I forgot!

					 						 Aubrey 						 What would you have done when we parted?

					 						 Paula 						 Why, killed myself.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula, dear!

					 						 Paula 						 It’s true. Putting the flower in his buttonhole. Do you know I feel certain I should make away with myself if anything serious happened to me.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Anything serious! What, has nothing ever been serious to you, Paula?

					 						 Paula 						 Not lately; not since a long while ago. I made up my mind then to have done with taking things seriously. If I hadn’t, I⁠—However, we won’t talk about that.

					 						 Aubrey 						 But now, now, life will be different to you, won’t it⁠—quite different? Eh, dear?

					 						 Paula 						 Oh yes, now. Only, Aubrey, mind you keep me always happy.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I will try to.

					 						 Paula 						 I know I couldn’t swallow a second big dose of misery. I know that if ever I felt wretched again⁠—truly wretched⁠—I should take a leaf out of Connie Tirlemont’s book. You remember? They found her⁠—With a look of horror.

					 						 Aubrey 						 For God’s sake, don’t let your thoughts run on such things!

					 						 Paula 						 Laughing. Ha, ha, how scared you look! There, think of the time! Dearest, what will my coachman say! My cloak!

					 						 						 							She runs off, gaily, by the upper door. Aubrey looks after her for a moment, then he walks up to the fire and stands warming his feet at the bars. As he does so he raises his head and observes the letters upon the mantelpiece. He takes one down quickly.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ah! Ellean! Opening the letter and reading. “My dear father⁠—A great change has come over me. I believe my mother in Heaven has spoken to me, and counselled me to turn to you in your loneliness. At any rate, your words have reached my heart, and I no longer feel fitted for this solemn life. I am ready to take my place by you. Dear father, will you receive me?⁠—Ellean.”

					 						 						 							Paula re-enters, dressed in a handsome cloak. He stares at her as if he hardly realised her presence.

					 						 Paula 						 What are you staring at? Don’t you admire my cloak?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes.

					 						 Paula 						 Couldn’t you wait till I’d gone before reading your letters?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Putting the letter away. I beg your pardon.

					 						 Paula 						 Take me downstairs to the carriage. Slipping her arm through his. How I tease you! Tomorrow! I’m so happy!

					 						 						 							They go out.





Act II


			A morning-room in Aubrey Tanqueray’s house, “Highercoombe,” near Willowmere, Surrey⁠—a bright and prettily furnished apartment of irregular shape, with double doors opening into a small hall at the back, another door on the left, and a large recessed window through which is obtained a view of extensive grounds. Everything about the room is charming and graceful. The fire is burning in the grate, and a small table is tastefully laid for breakfast. It is a morning in early Spring, and the sun is streaming in through the window.

			 				 					 						 						 Aubrey and Paula are seated at breakfast, and Aubrey is silently reading his letters. Two servants, a man and a woman, hand dishes and then retire. After a little while Aubrey puts his letters aside and looks across to the window.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Sunshine! Spring!

					 						 Paula 						 Glancing at the clock. Exactly six minutes.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Six minutes?

					 						 Paula 						 Six minutes, Aubrey dear, since you made your last remark.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I beg your pardon; I was reading my letters. Have you seen Ellean this morning?

					 						 Paula 						 Coldly. Your last observation but one was about Ellean.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Dearest, what shall I talk about?

					 						 Paula 						 Ellean breakfasted two hours ago, Morgan tells me, and then went out walking with her dog.

					 						 Aubrey 						 She wraps up warmly, I hope; this sunshine is deceptive.

					 						 Paula 						 I ran about the lawn last night, after dinner, in satin shoes. Were you anxious about me?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Certainly.

					 						 Paula 						 Melting. Really?

					 						 Aubrey 						 You make me wretchedly anxious; you delight in doing incautious things. You are incurable.

					 						 Paula 						 Ah, what a beast I am! Going to him and kissing him, then glancing at the letters by his side. A letter from Cayley?

					 						 Aubrey 						 He is staying very near here, with Mrs.⁠—Very near here.

					 						 Paula 						 With the lady whose chimneys we have the honour of contemplating from our windows?

					 						 Aubrey 						 With Mrs. Cortelyon⁠—yes.

					 						 Paula 						 Mrs. Cortelyon! The woman who might have set the example of calling on me when we first threw out roots in this deadly-lively soil! Deuce take Mrs. Cortelyon!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Hush! my dear girl!

					 						 Paula 						 Returning to her seat. Oh, I know she’s an old acquaintance of yours⁠—and of the first Mrs. Tanqueray. And she joins the rest of ’em in slapping the second Mrs. Tanqueray in the face. However, I have my revenge⁠—she’s six-and-forty, and I wish nothing worse to happen to any woman.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Well, she’s going to town, Cayley says here, and his visit’s at an end. He’s coming over this morning to call on you. Shall we ask him to transfer himself to us? Do say yes.

					 						 Paula 						 Yes.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Gladly. Ah, ha! old Cayley!

					 						 Paula 						 Coldly. He’ll amuse you.

					 						 Aubrey 						 And you too.

					 						 Paula 						 Because you find a companion, shall I be boisterously hilarious?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Come, come! He talks London, and you know you like that.

					 						 Paula 						 London! London or Heaven! which is farther from me!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 Oh! Oh, I am so bored, Aubrey!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Gathering up his letters and going to her, leaning over her shoulder. Baby, what can I do for you?

					 						 Paula 						 I suppose, nothing. You have done all you can for me.

					 						 Aubrey 						 What do you mean?

					 						 Paula 						 You have married me.

					 						 						 							He walks away from her thoughtfully, to the writing-table. As he places his letters on the table he sees an addressed letter, stamped for the post, lying on the blotting-book; he picks it up.

					 						 Aubrey 						 In an altered tone. You’ve been writing this morning before breakfast?

					 						 Paula 						 Looking at him quickly, then away again. Er⁠—that letter.

					 						 Aubrey 						 With the letter in his hand. To Lady Orreyed. Why?

					 						 Paula 						 Why not? Mabel’s an old friend of mine.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Are you⁠—corresponding?

					 						 Paula 						 I heard from her yesterday. They’ve just returned from the Riviera. She seems happy.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Sarcastically. That’s good news.

					 						 Paula 						 Why are you always so cutting about Mabel? She’s a kindhearted girl. Everything’s altered; she even thinks of letting her hair go back to brown. She’s Lady Orreyed. She’s married to George. What’s the matter with her?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Turning away. Oh!

					 						 Paula 						 You drive me mad sometimes with the tone you take about things! Great goodness, if you come to that, George Orreyed’s wife isn’t a bit worse than yours! He faces her suddenly. I suppose I needn’t have made that observation.

					 						 Aubrey 						 No, there was scarcely a necessity.

					 						 						 							He throws the letter on to the table, and takes up the newspaper.

					 						 Paula 						 I am very sorry.

					 						 Aubrey 						 All right, dear.

					 						 Paula 						 Trifling with the letter. I⁠—I’d better tell you what I’ve written. I meant to do so, of course. I⁠—I’ve asked the Orreyeds to come and stay with us. He looks at her and lets the paper fall to the ground in a helpless way. George was a great friend of Cayley’s; I’m sure he would be delighted to meet them here.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Laughing mirthlessly. Ha, ha, ha! They say Orreyed has taken to tippling at dinner. Heavens above!

					 						 Paula 						 Oh! I’ve no patience with you! You’ll kill me with this life! She selects some flowers from a vase on the table, cuts and arranges them, and fastens them in her bodice. What is my existence, Sunday to Saturday? In the morning, a drive down to the village, with the groom, to give my orders to the tradespeople. At lunch, you and Ellean. In the afternoon, a novel, the newspapers; if fine, another drive⁠—if fine! Tea⁠—you and Ellean. Then two hours of dusk; then dinner⁠—you and Ellean. Then a game of Bésique, you and I, while Ellean reads a religious book in a dull corner. Then a yawn from me, another from you, a sigh from Ellean; three figures suddenly rise⁠—“Good night, good night, good night!” Imitating a kiss. “God bless you!” Ah!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes, yes, Paula⁠—yes, dearest⁠—that’s what it is now. But, by-and-by, if people begin to come round us⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Hah! That’s where we’ve made the mistake, my friend Aubrey! Pointing to the window. Do you believe these people will ever come round us? Your former crony, Mrs. Cortelyon? Or the grim old vicar, or that wife of his whose huge nose is positively indecent? Or the Ullathornes, or the Gollans, or Lady William Petres? I know better! And when the young ones gradually take the place of the old, there will still remain the sacred tradition that the dreadful person who lives at the top of the hill is never, under any circumstances, to be called upon! And so we shall go on here, year in and year out, until the sap is run out of our lives, and we’re stale and dry and withered from sheer, solitary respectability. Upon my word, I wonder we didn’t see that we should have been far happier if we’d gone in for the devil-may-care, café-living sort of life in town! After all, I have a set and you might have joined it. It’s true I did want, dearly, dearly, to be a married woman, but where’s the pride in being a married woman among married women who are⁠—married! If⁠—Seeing that Aubrey’s head has sunk into his hands. Aubrey! My dear boy! You’re not⁠—crying?

					 						 						 							He looks up, with a flushed face. Ellean enters, dressed very simply for walking. She is a low voiced, grave girl of about nineteen, with a face somewhat resembling a Madonna. Towards Paula her manner is cold and distant.

					 						 Aubrey 						 In an undertone. Ellean!

					 						 Ellean 						 Good morning, papa. Good morning, Paula.

					 						 						 							Paula puts her arms round Ellean and kisses her. Ellean makes little response.

					 						 Paula 						 Good morning. Brightly. We’ve been breakfasting this side of the house, to get the sun.

					 						 						 							She sits at the piano and rattles at a gay melody. Seeing that Paula’s back is turned to them, Ellean goes to Aubrey and kisses him; he returns the kiss almost furtively. As they separate, the servants re-enter, and proceed to carry out the breakfast-table.

					 						 Aubrey 						 To Ellean. I guess where you’ve been: there’s some gorse clinging to your frock.

					 						 Ellean 						 Removing a sprig of gorse from her skirt. Rover and I walked nearly as far as Black Moor. The poor fellow has a thorn in his pad; I am going upstairs for my tweezers.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ellean! She returns to him. Paula is a little depressed⁠—out of sorts. She complains that she has no companion.

					 						 Ellean 						 I am with Paula nearly all the day, papa.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ah, but you’re such a little mouse. Paula likes cheerful people about her.

					 						 Ellean 						 I’m afraid I am naturally rather silent; and it’s so difficult to seem to be what one is not.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I don’t wish that, Ellean.

					 						 Ellean 						 I will offer to go down to the village with Paula this morning⁠—shall I?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Touching her hand gently. Thank you⁠—do.

					 						 Ellean 						 When I’ve looked after Rover, I’ll come back to her.

					 						 						 							She goes out; Paula ceases playing, and turns on the music-stool looking at Aubrey.

					 						 Paula 						 Well, have you and Ellean had your little confidence?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Confidence?

					 						 Paula 						 Do you think I couldn’t feel it, like a pain between my shoulders?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ellean is coming back in a few minutes to be with you. Bending over her. Paula, Paula dear, is this how you keep your promise?

					 						 Paula 						 Oh! Rising impatiently and crossing swiftly to the settee, where she sits, moving restlessly. I can’t keep my promise; I am jealous; it won’t be smothered. I see you looking at her, watching her; your voice drops when you speak to her. I know how fond you are of that girl, Aubrey.

					 						 Aubrey 						 What would you have? I’ve no other home for her. She is my daughter.

					 						 Paula 						 She is your saint. Saint Ellean!

					 						 Aubrey 						 You have often told me how good and sweet you think her.

					 						 Paula 						 Good!⁠—yes! Do you imagine that makes me less jealous? Going to him and clinging to his arm. Aubrey, there are two sorts of affection⁠—the love for a woman you respect, and the love for a woman you⁠—love. She gets the first from you: I never can.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Hush, hush! you don’t realise what you say.

					 						 Paula 						 If Ellean cared for me only a little, it would be different. I shouldn’t be jealous then. Why doesn’t she care for me?

					 						 Aubrey 						 She⁠—she⁠—she will, in time.

					 						 Paula 						 You can’t say that without stuttering.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Her disposition seems a little unresponsive; she resembles her mother in many ways; I can see it every day.

					 						 Paula 						 She’s marble. It’s a shame. There’s not the slightest excuse; for all she knows, I’m as much a saint as she⁠—only married. Dearest, help me to win her over!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Help you?

					 						 Paula 						 You can. Teach her that it is her duty to love me; she hangs on to every word you speak. I’m sure, Aubrey, that the love of a nice woman who believed me to be like herself would do me a world of good. You’d get the benefit of it as well as I. It would soothe me; it would make me less horribly restless; it would take this⁠—this⁠—mischievous feeling from me. Coaxingly. Aubrey!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Have patience; everything will come right.

					 						 Paula 						 Yes, if you help me.

					 						 Aubrey 						 In the meantime you will tear up your letter to Lady Orreyed, won’t you?

					 						 Paula 						 Kissing his hand. Of course I will⁠—anything!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ah, thank you, dearest! Laughing. Why, good gracious!⁠—ha, ha!⁠—just imagine “Saint Ellean” and that woman side by side!

					 						 Paula 						 Going back with a cry. Ah!

					 						 Aubrey 						 What?

					 						 Paula 						 Passionately. It’s Ellean you’re considering, not me? It’s all Ellean with you! Ellean! Ellean!

					 						 						 							Ellean re-enters.

					 						 Ellean 						 Did you call me, Paula? Clenching his hands, Aubrey turns away and goes out. Is papa angry?

					 						 Paula 						 I drive him distracted sometimes. There, I confess it!

					 						 Ellean 						 Do you? Oh, why do you?

					 						 Paula 						 Because I⁠—because I’m jealous.

					 						 Ellean 						 Jealous?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes⁠—of you. Ellean is silent. Well, what do you think of that?

					 						 Ellean 						 I knew it; I’ve seen it. It hurts me dreadfully. What do you wish me to do? Go away?

					 						 Paula 						 Leave us! Beckoning her with a motion of the head. Look here! Ellean goes to Paula slowly and unresponsively. You could cure me of my jealousy very easily. Why don’t you⁠—like me?

					 						 Ellean 						 What do you mean by⁠—like you? I don’t understand.

					 						 Paula 						 Love me.

					 						 Ellean 						 Love is not a feeling that is under one’s control. I shall alter as time goes on, perhaps. I didn’t begin to love my father deeply till a few months ago, and then I obeyed my mother.

					 						 Paula 						 Ah, yes, you dream things, don’t you⁠—see them in your sleep? You fancy your mother speaks to you?

					 						 Ellean 						 When you have lost your mother it is a comfort to believe that she is dead only to this life, that she still watches over her child. I do believe that of my mother.

					 						 Paula 						 Well, and so you haven’t been bidden to love me?

					 						 Ellean 						 After a pause, almost inaudibly. No.

					 						 Paula 						 Dreams are only a hash-up of one’s day-thoughts, I suppose you know. Think intently of anything, and it’s bound to come back to you at night. I don’t cultivate dreams myself.

					 						 Ellean 						 Ah, I knew you would only sneer!

					 						 Paula 						 I’m not sneering; I’m speaking the truth. I say that if you cared for me in the daytime I should soon make friends with those nightmares of yours. Ellean, why don’t you try to look on me as your second mother? Of course there are not many years between us, but I’m ever so much older than you⁠—in experience. I shall have no children of my own, I know that; it would be a real comfort to me if you would make me feel we belonged to each other. Won’t you? Perhaps you think I’m odd⁠—not nice. Well, the fact is I’ve two sides to my nature, and I’ve let the one almost smother the other. A few years ago I went through some trouble, and since then I haven’t shed a tear. I believe if you put your arms round me just once I should run upstairs and have a good cry. There, I’ve talked to you as I’ve never talked to a woman in my life. Ellean, you seem to fear me. Don’t! Kiss me!

					 						 						 							With a cry, almost of despair, Ellean turns from Paula and sinks on to the settee, covering her face with her hands.

					 						 Paula 						 Indignantly. Oh! Why is it! How dare you treat me like this? What do you mean by it? What do you mean?

					 						 						 							A Servant enters.

					 						 Servant 						 Mr. Drummle, ma’am.

					 						 						 							Cayley Drummle, in riding dress, enters briskly.

					 						 						 							The Servant retires.

					 						 Paula 						 Recovering herself. Well, Cayley!

					 						 Drummle 						 Shaking hands with her cordially. How are you? Shaking hands with Ellean, who rises. I saw you in the distance an hour ago, in the gorse near Stapleton’s.

					 						 Ellean 						 I didn’t see you, Mr. Drummle.

					 						 Drummle 						 My dear Ellean, it is my experience that no charming young lady of nineteen ever does see a man of forty-five. Laughing. Ha, Ha!

					 						 Ellean 						 Going to the door. Paula, papa wishes me to drive down to the village with you this morning. Do you care to take me?

					 						 Paula 						 Coldly. Oh, by all means. Pray tell Watts to balance the cart for three.

					 						 						 							Ellean goes out.

					 						 Drummle 						 How’s Aubrey?

					 						 Paula 						 Very well⁠—when Ellean’s about the house.

					 						 Drummle 						 And you? I needn’t ask.

					 						 Paula 						 Walking away to the window. Oh, a dog’s life, my dear Cayley, mine.

					 						 Drummle 						 Eh?

					 						 Paula 						 Doesn’t that define a happy marriage? I’m sleek, well-kept, well-fed, never without a bone to gnaw and fresh straw to lie upon. Gazing out of the window. Oh, dear me!

					 						 Drummle 						 H’m! Well, I heartily congratulate you on your kennel. The view from the terrace here is superb.

					 						 Paula 						 Yes, I can see London.

					 						 Drummle 						 London! Not quite so far, surely?

					 						 Paula 						 I can. Also the Mediterranean, on a fine day. I wonder what Algiers looks like this morning from the sea! Impulsively. Oh, Cayley, do you remember those jolly times on board Peter Jarman’s yacht when we lay off⁠—? Stopping suddenly, seeing Drummle staring at her. Good gracious! What are we talking about!

					 						 						 							Aubrey enters.

					 						 Aubrey 						 To Drummle. Dear old chap! Has Paula asked you?

					 						 Paula 						 Not yet.

					 						 Aubrey 						 We want you to come to us, now that you’re leaving Mrs. Cortelyon⁠—at once, today. Stay a month, as long as you please⁠—eh, Paula?

					 						 Paula 						 As long as you can possibly endure it⁠—do, Cayley.

					 						 Drummle 						 Looking at Aubrey. Delighted. To Paula. Charming of you to have me.

					 						 Paula 						 My dear man, you’re a blessing. I must telegraph to London for more fish! A strange appetite to cater for! Something to do, to do, to do!

					 						 						 							She goes out in a mood of almost childish delight.

					 						 Drummle 						 Eyeing Aubrey. Well?

					 						 Aubrey 						 With a wearied, anxious look. Well, Cayley?

					 						 Drummle 						 How are you getting on?

					 						 Aubrey 						 My position doesn’t grow less difficult. I told you, when I met you last week, of this feverish, jealous attachment of Paula’s for Ellean?

					 						 Drummle 						 Yes. I hardly know why, but I came to the conclusion that you don’t consider it an altogether fortunate attachment.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ellean doesn’t respond to it.

					 						 Drummle 						 These are early days. Ellean will warm towards your wife by-and-by.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ah, but there’s the question, Cayley!

					 						 Drummle 						 What question?

					 						 Aubrey 						 The question which positively distracts me. Ellean is so different from⁠—most women; I don’t believe a purer creature exists out of heaven. And I⁠—I ask myself, am I doing right in exposing her to the influence of poor Paula’s light, careless nature?

					 						 Drummle 						 My dear Aubrey!

					 						 Aubrey 						 That shocks you! So it does me. I assure you I long to urge my girl to break down the reserve which keeps her apart from Paula, but somehow I can’t do it⁠—well, I don’t do it. How can I make you understand? But when you come to us you’ll understand quickly enough. Cayley, there’s hardly a subject you can broach on which poor Paula hasn’t some strange, out-of-the-way thought to give utterance to; some curious, warped notion. They are not mere worldly thoughts⁠—unless, good God! they belong to the little hellish world which our blackguardism has created: no, her ideas have too little calculation in them to be called worldly. But it makes it the more dreadful that such thoughts should be ready, spontaneous; that expressing them has become a perfectly natural process; that her words, acts even, have almost lost their proper significance for her, and seem beyond her control. Ah, and the pain of listening to it all from the woman one loves, the woman one hoped to make happy and contented, who is really and truly a good woman, as it were, maimed! Well, this is my burden, and I shouldn’t speak to you of it but for my anxiety about Ellean. Ellean! What is to be her future? It is in my hands; what am I to do? Cayley, when I remember how Ellean comes to me, from another world I always think, when I realise the charge that’s laid on me, I find myself wishing, in a sort of terror, that my child were safe under the ground!

					 						 Drummle 						 My dear Aubrey, aren’t you making a mistake?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Very likely. What is it?

					 						 Drummle 						 A mistake, not in regarding your Ellean as an angel, but in believing that, under any circumstances, it would be possible for her to go through life without getting her white robe⁠—shall we say, a little dusty at the hem? Don’t take me for a cynic. I am sure there are many women upon earth who are almost divinely innocent; but being on earth, they must send their robes to the laundry occasionally. Ah, and it’s right that they should have to do so, for what can they learn from the checking of their little washing-bills but lessons of charity? Now I see but two courses open to you for the disposal of your angel.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes?

					 						 Drummle 						 You must either restrict her to a paradise which is, like every earthly paradise, necessarily somewhat imperfect, or treat her as an ordinary flesh-and-blood young woman, and give her the advantages of that society to which she properly belongs.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Advantages?

					 						 Drummle 						 My dear Aubrey, of all forms of innocence mere ignorance is the least admirable. Take my advice, let her walk and talk and suffer and be healed with the great crowd. Do it, and hope that she’ll some day meet a good, honest fellow who’ll make her life complete, happy, secure. Now you see what I’m driving at.

					 						 Aubrey 						 A sanguine programme, my dear Cayley! Oh, I’m not pooh-poohing it. Putting sentiment aside, of course I know that a fortunate marriage for Ellean would be the best⁠—perhaps the only⁠—solution of my difficulty. But you forget the danger of the course you suggest.

					 						 Drummle 						 Danger?

					 						 Aubrey 						 If Ellean goes among men and women, how can she escape from learning, sooner or later, the history of⁠—poor Paula’s⁠—old life?

					 						 Drummle 						 H’m! You remember the episode of the Jeweller’s Son in the Arabian Nights? Of course you don’t. Well, if your daughter lives, she can’t escape⁠—what you’re afraid of. Aubrey gives a half stifled exclamation of pain. And when she does hear the story, surely it would be better that she should have some knowledge of the world to help her to understand it.

					 						 Aubrey 						 To understand!

					 						 Drummle 						 To understand, to⁠—to philosophise.

					 						 Aubrey 						 To philosophise?

					 						 Drummle 						 Philosophy is toleration, and it is only one step from toleration to forgiveness.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You’re right, Cayley; I believe you always are. Yes, yes. But, even if I had the courage to attempt to solve the problem of Ellean’s future in this way, I⁠—I’m helpless.

					 						 Drummle 						 How?

					 						 Aubrey 						 What means have I now of placing my daughter in the world I’ve left?

					 						 Drummle 						 Oh, some friend⁠—some woman friend.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I have none; they’re gone.

					 						 Drummle 						 You’re wrong there; I know one⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 Listening. That’s Paula’s cart. Let’s discuss this again.

					 						 Drummle 						 Going up to the window and looking out. It isn’t the dogcart. Turning to Aubrey. I hope you’ll forgive me, old chap.

					 						 Aubrey 						 What for?

					 						 Drummle 						 Whose wheels do you think have been cutting ruts in your immaculate drive?

					 						 						 							A Servant enters.

					 						 Servant 						 To Aubrey. Mrs. Cortelyon, sir.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Mrs. Cortelyon! After a short pause. Very well. The Servant withdraws. What on earth is the meaning of this?

					 						 Drummle 						 Ahem! While I’ve been our old friend’s guest, Aubrey, we have very naturally talked a good deal about you and yours.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Indeed, have you?

					 						 Drummle 						 Yes, and Alice Cortelyon has arrived at the conclusion that it would have been far kinder had she called on Mrs. Tanqueray long ago. She’s going abroad for Easter before settling down in London for the season, and I believe she has come over this morning to ask for Ellean’s companionship.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Oh, I see! Frowning. Quite a friendly little conspiracy, my dear Cayley!

					 						 Drummle 						 Conspiracy! Not at all, I assure you. Laughing. Ha, ha!

					 						 						 							Ellean enters from the hall with Mrs. Cortelyon, a handsome, good humoured, spirited woman of about forty-five.

					 						 Ellean 						 Papa⁠—

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 To Aubrey, shaking hands with him heartily. Well, Aubrey, how are you? I’ve just been telling this great girl of yours that I knew her when she was a sad-faced, pale baby. How is Mrs. Tanqueray? I have been a bad neighbour, and I’m here to beg forgiveness. Is she indoors?

					 						 Aubrey 						 She’s upstairs putting on a hat, I believe.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Sitting comfortably. Ah! She looks round: Drummle and Ellean are talking together in the hall. We used to be very frank with each other, Aubrey. I suppose the old footing is no longer possible, eh?

					 						 Aubrey 						 If so, I’m not entirely to blame, Mrs. Cortelyon.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Mrs. Cortelyon? H’m! No, I admit it. But you must make some little allowance for me, Mr. Tanqueray. Your first wife and I, as girls, were like two cherries on one stalk, and then I was the confidential friend of your married life. That post, perhaps, wasn’t altogether a sinecure. And now⁠—well, when a woman gets to my age I suppose she’s a stupid, prejudiced, conventional creature. However, I’ve got over it and⁠—Giving him her hand⁠—I hope you’ll be enormously happy and let me be a friend once more.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Thank you, Alice.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 That’s right. I feel more cheerful than I’ve done for weeks. But I suppose it would serve me right if the second Mrs. Tanqueray showed me the door. Do you think she will?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Listening. Here is my wife. Mrs. Cortelyon rises, and Paula enters, dressed for driving; she stops abruptly on seeing Mrs. Cortelyon. Paula dear, Mrs. Cortelyon has called to see you.

					 						 						 							Paula starts, looks at Mrs. Cortelyon irresolutely, then after a slight pause barely touches Mrs. Cortelyon’s extended hand.

					 						 Paula 						 Whose manner now alternates between deliberate insolence and assumed sweetness. Mrs.⁠—? What name, Aubrey?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Mrs. Cortelyon.

					 						 Paula 						 Cortelyon? Oh, yes. Cortelyon.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Carefully guarding herself throughout against any expression of resentment. Aubrey ought to have told you that Alice Cortelyon and he are very old friends.

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, very likely he has mentioned the circumstance. I have quite a wretched memory.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 You know we are neighbours, Mrs. Tanqueray.

					 						 Paula 						 Neighbours? Are we really? Won’t you sit down? They both sit. Neighbours! That’s most interesting!

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Very near neighbours. You can see my roof from your windows.

					 						 Paula 						 I fancy I have observed a roof. But you have been away from home; you have only just returned.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 I? What makes you think that?

					 						 Paula 						 Why, because it is two months since we came to Highercoombe, and I don’t remember your having called.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Your memory is now terribly accurate. No, I’ve not been away from home, and it is to explain my neglect that I am here, rather unceremoniously, this morning.

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, to explain⁠—quite so. With mock solicitude. Ah, you’ve been very ill; I ought to have seen that before.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Ill!

					 						 Paula 						 You look dreadfully pulled down. We poor women show illness so plainly in our faces, don’t we?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Anxiously. Paula dear, Mrs. Cortelyon is the picture of health.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 With some asperity. I have never felt better in my life.

					 						 Paula 						 Looking round innocently. Have I said anything awkward? Aubrey, tell Mrs. Cortelyon how stupid and thoughtless I always am!

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 To Drummle who is now standing close to her. Really, Cayley⁠—! He soothes her with a nod and smile and a motion of his finger to his lip. Mrs. Tanqueray, I am afraid my explanation will not be quite so satisfactory as either of those you have just helped me to. You may have heard⁠—but, if you have heard, you have doubtless forgotten⁠—that twenty years ago, when your husband first lived here, I was a constant visitor at Highercoombe.

					 						 Paula 						 Twenty years ago⁠—fancy. I was a naughty little child then.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Possibly. Well, at that time, and till the end of her life, my affections were centred upon the lady of this house.

					 						 Paula 						 Were they? That was very sweet of you.

					 						 						 							Ellean approaches Mrs. Cortelyon, listening intently to her.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 I will say no more on that score, but I must add this: when, two months ago, you came here, I realised, perhaps for the first time, that I was a middle-aged woman, and that it had become impossible for me to accept without some effort a breaking-in upon many tender associations. There, Mrs. Tanqueray, that is my confession. Will you try to understand it and pardon me?

					 						 Paula 						 Watching Ellean⁠—sneeringly. Ellean dear, you appear to be very interested in Mrs. Cortelyon’s reminiscences; I don’t think I can do better than make you my mouthpiece⁠—there is such sympathy between us. What do you say⁠—can we bring ourselves to forgive Mrs. Cortelyon for neglecting us for two weary months?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 To Ellean, pleasantly. Well, Ellean? With a little cry of tenderness Ellean impulsively sits beside Mrs. Cortelyon and takes her hand. My dear child!

					 						 Paula 						 In an undertone to Aubrey. Ellean isn’t so very slow in taking to Mrs. Cortelyon!

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 To Paula and Aubrey. Come, this encourages me to broach my scheme. Mrs. Tanqueray, it strikes me that you two good people are just now excellent company for each other, while Ellean would perhaps be glad of a little peep into the world you are anxious to avoid. Now, I’m going to Paris tomorrow for a week or two before settling down in Chester Square, so⁠—don’t gasp, both of you!⁠—if this girl is willing, and you have made no other arrangements for her, will you let her come with me to Paris, and afterwards remain with me in town during the Season? Ellean utters an exclamation of surprise. Paula is silent. What do you say?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula⁠—Paula dear. Hesitatingly. My dear Mrs. Cortelyon, this is wonderfully kind of you; I am really at a loss to⁠—eh, Cayley?

					 						 Drummle 						 Watching Paula apprehensively. Kind! Now I must say I don’t think so! I begged Alice to take me to Paris, and she declined. I am thrown over for Ellean! Ha! ha!

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Laughing. What nonsense you talk, Cayley!

					 						 						 							The laughter dies out. Paula remains quite still.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula dear.

					 						 Paula 						 Slowly collecting herself. One moment. I⁠—I don’t quite⁠—To Mrs. Cortelyon. You propose that Ellean leaves Highercoombe almost at once and remains with you some months?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 It would be a mercy to me. You can afford to be generous to a desolate old widow. Come, Mrs. Tanqueray, won’t you spare her?

					 						 Paula 						 Won’t I spare her. Suspiciously. Have you mentioned your plan to Aubrey⁠—before I came in?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 No, I had no opportunity.

					 						 Paula 						 Nor to Ellean?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Oh, no.

					 						 Paula 						 Looking about her, in suppressed excitement. This hasn’t been discussed at all, behind my back?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 My dear Mrs. Tanqueray!

					 						 Paula 						 Ellean, let us hear your voice in the matter!

					 						 Ellean 						 I should like to go with Mrs. Cortelyon⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Ah!

					 						 Ellean 						 That is, if⁠—if⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 If⁠—if what?

					 						 Ellean 						 Looking towards Aubrey, appealingly. Papa!

					 						 Paula 						 In a hard voice. Oh, of course⁠—I forgot. To Aubrey. My dear Aubrey, it rests with you, naturally, whether I am⁠—to lose⁠—Ellean.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Lose Ellean! Advancing to Paula. There is no question of losing Ellean. You would see Ellean in town constantly when she returned from Paris; isn’t that so, Mrs. Cortelyon?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Certainly.

					 						 Paula 						 Laughing softly. Oh, I didn’t know I should be allowed that privilege.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Privilege, my dear Mrs. Tanqueray!

					 						 Paula 						 Ha, ha! that makes all the difference, doesn’t it?

					 						 Aubrey 						 With assumed gaiety. All the difference? I should think so! To Ellean, laying his hand upon her head, tenderly. And you are quite certain you wish to see what the world is like on the other side of Black Moor?

					 						 Ellean 						 If you are willing, papa, I am quite certain.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Looking at Paula irresolutely, then speaking with an effort. Then I⁠—I am willing.

					 						 Paula 						 Rising and striking the table lightly with her clenched hand. That decides it! There is a general movement. Excitedly to Mrs. Cortelyon, who advances towards her. When do you want her?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 We go to town this afternoon at five o’clock, and sleep tonight at Bayliss’s. There is barely time for her to make her preparations.

					 						 Paula 						 I will undertake that she is ready.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 I’ve a great deal to scramble through at home too, as you may guess. Goodbye!

					 						 Paula 						 Turning away. Mrs. Cortelyon is going.

					 						 						 							Paula stands looking out of the window, with her back to those in the room.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 To Drummle. Cayley⁠—

					 						 Drummle 						 To her. Eh?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 I’ve gone through it, for the sake of Aubrey and his child, but I⁠—I feel a hundred. Is that a madwoman?

					 						 Drummle 						 Of course; all jealous women are mad.

					 						 						 							He goes out with Aubrey.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Hesitatingly, to Paula. Goodbye, Mrs. Tanqueray.

					 						 						 							Paula inclines her head with the slightest possible movement, then resumes her former position. Ellean comes from the hall and takes Mrs. Cortelyon out of the room. After a brief silence, Paula turns with a fierce cry, and hurriedly takes off her coat and hat, and tosses them upon the settee.

					 						 Paula 						 Oh! Oh! Oh! She drops into the chair as Aubrey returns; he stands looking at her. Who’s that?

					 						 Aubrey 						 I. You have altered your mind about going out?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes. Please to ring the bell.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Touching the bell. You are angry about Mrs. Cortelyon and Ellean. Let me try to explain my reasons⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Be careful what you say to me just now! I have never felt like this⁠—except once⁠—in my life. Be careful what you say to me!

					 						 						 							A Servant enters.

					 						 Paula 						 Rising. Is Watts at the door with the cart?

					 						 Servant 						 Yes, ma’am.

					 						 Paula 						 Tell him to drive down to the post-office directly, with this.

					 						 						 							Picking up the letter which has been lying upon the table.

					 						 Aubrey 						 With that?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes. My letter to Lady Orreyed.

					 						 						 							Giving the letter to the Servant, who goes out.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Surely you don’t wish me to countermand any order of yours to a servant? Call the man back⁠—take the letter from him!

					 						 Paula 						 I have not the slightest intention of doing so.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I must, then. Going to the door. She snatches up her hat and coat and follows him. What are you going to do?

					 						 Paula 						 If you stop that letter, walk out of the house.

					 						 						 							He hesitates, then leaves the door.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I am right in believing that to be the letter inviting George Orreyed and his wife to stay here, am I not?

					 						 Paula 						 Oh yes⁠—quite right.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Let it go; I’ll write to him by-and-by.

					 						 Paula 						 Facing him. You dare!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Hush, Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 Insult me again and, upon my word, I’ll go straight out of the house!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Insult you?

					 						 Paula 						 Insult me! What else is it? My God! what else is it? What do you mean by taking Ellean from me?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Listen⁠—!

					 						 Paula 						 Listen to me! And how do you take her? You pack her off in the care of a woman who has deliberately held aloof from me, who’s thrown mud at me! Yet this Cortelyon creature has only to put foot here once to be entrusted with the charge of the girl you know I dearly want to keep near me!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula dear! hear me⁠—!

					 						 Paula 						 Ah! of course, of course! I can’t be so useful to your daughter as such people as this; and so I’m to be given the go-by for any town friend of yours who turns up and chooses to patronise us! Hah! Very well, at any rate, as you take Ellean from me you justify my looking for companions where I can most readily find ’em.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You wish me to fully appreciate your reason for sending that letter to Lady Orreyed?

					 						 Paula 						 Precisely⁠—I do.

					 						 Aubrey 						 And could you, after all, go back to associates of that order? It’s not possible!

					 						 Paula 						 Mockingly. What, not after the refining influence of these intensely respectable surroundings? Going to the door. We’ll see!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 Violently. We’ll see!

					 						 						 							She goes out. He stands still looking after her.





Act III


			The drawing-room at “Highercoombe.” Facing the spectator are two large French windows, sheltered by a verandah, leading into the garden; on the right is a door opening into a small hall. The fireplace, with a large mirror above it, is on the left-hand side of the room, and higher up in the same wall are double doors recessed. The room is richly furnished, and everything betokens taste and luxury. The windows are open, and there is moonlight in the garden.

			 				 					 						 						 Lady Orreyed, a pretty, affected doll of a woman with a mincing voice and flaxen hair, is sitting on the ottoman, her head resting against the drum, and her eyes closed. Paula, looking pale, worn, and thoroughly unhappy, is sitting at a table. Both are in sumptuous dinner-gowns.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Opening her eyes. Well, I never! I dropped off! Feeling her hair. Just fancy! Where are the men?

					 						 Paula 						 Icily. Outside, smoking.

					 						 						 							A Servant enters with coffee, which he hands to Lady Orreyed. Sir George Orreyed comes in by the window. He is a man of about thirty-five, with a low forehead, a receding chin, a vacuous expression, and an ominous redness about the nose.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Taking coffee. Here’s Dodo.

					 						 Sir George 						 I say, the flies under the verandah make you swear. The Servant hands coffee to Paula, who declines it, then to Sir George, who takes a cup. Hi! wait a bit! He looks at the tray searchingly, then puts back his cup. Never mind. Quietly to Lady Orreyed. I say, they’re dooced sparin’ with their liqueur, ain’t they?

					 						 						 							The Servant goes out at window.

					 						 Paula 						 To Sir George. Won’t you take coffee, George?

					 						 Sir George 						 No, thanks. It’s gettin’ near time for a whisky and potass. Approaching Paula, regarding Lady Orreyed admiringly. I say, Birdie looks rippin’ tonight, don’t she?

					 						 Paula 						 Your wife?

					 						 Sir George 						 Yaas⁠—Birdie.

					 						 Paula 						 Rippin’?

					 						 Sir George 						 Yaas.

					 						 Paula 						 Quite⁠—quite rippin’.

					 						 						 							He moves round to the settee. Paula watches him with distaste, then rises and walks away. Sir George falls asleep on the settee.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Paula love, I fancied you and Aubrey were a little more friendly at dinner. You haven’t made it up, have you?

					 						 Paula 						 We? Oh, no. We speak before others, that’s all.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 And how long do you intend to carry on this game, dear?

					 						 Paula 						 Turning away impatiently. I really can’t tell you.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Sit down, old girl; don’t be so fidgety. Paula sits on the upper seat of the ottoman with her back to Lady Orreyed. Of course, it’s my duty, as an old friend, to give you a good talking-to⁠—Paula glares at her suddenly and fiercely⁠—but really I’ve found one gets so many smacks in the face through interfering in matrimonial squabbles that I’ve determined to drop it.

					 						 Paula 						 I think you’re wise.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 However, I must say that I do wish you’d look at marriage in a more solemn light⁠—just as I do, in fact. It is such a beautiful thing⁠—marriage, and if people in our position don’t respect it, and set a good example by living happily with their husbands, what can you expect from the middle classes? When did this sad state of affairs between you and Aubrey actually begin?

					 						 Paula 						 Actually, a fortnight and three days ago; I haven’t calculated the minutes.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 A day or two before Dodo and I turned up⁠—arrived.

					 						 Paula 						 Yes. One always remembers one thing by another; we left off speaking to each other the morning I wrote asking you to visit us.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Lucky for you I was able to pop down, wasn’t it, dear?

					 						 Paula 						 Glaring at her again. Most fortunate.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 A serious split with your husband without a pal on the premises⁠—I should say, without a friend in the house⁠—would be most unpleasant.

					 						 Paula 						 Turning to her abruptly. This place must be horribly doleful for you and George just now. At least you ought to consider him before me. Why don’t you leave me to my difficulties?

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Oh, we’re quite comfortable, dear, thank you⁠—both of us. George and me are so wrapped up in each other, it doesn’t matter where we are. I don’t want to crow over you, old girl, but I’ve got a perfect husband.

					 						 						 							Sir George is now fast asleep, his head thrown back and his mouth open, looking hideous.

					 						 Paula 						 Glancing at Sir George. So you’ve given me to understand.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Not that we don’t have our little differences. Why, we fell out only this very morning. You remember the diamond and ruby tiara Charley Prestwick gave poor dear Connie Tirlemont years ago, don’t you?

					 						 Paula 						 No, I do not.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 No? Well, it’s in the market. Benjamin of Piccadilly has got it in his shopwindow, and I’ve set my heart on it.

					 						 Paula 						 You consider it quite necessary?

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Yes, because what I say to Dodo is this⁠—a lady of my station must smother herself with hair ornaments. It’s different with you, love⁠—people don’t look for so much blaze from you, but I’ve got rank to keep up; haven’t I?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Well, that was the cause of the little set-to between I and Dodo this morning. He broke two chairs, he was in such a rage. I forgot, they’re your chairs; do you mind?

					 						 Paula 						 No.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 You know, poor Dodo can’t lose his temper without smashing something; if it isn’t a chair, it’s a mirror; if it isn’t that, it’s china⁠—a bit of Dresden for choice. Dear old pet! he loves a bit of Dresden when he’s furious. He doesn’t really throw things at me, dear; he simply lifts them up and drops them, like a gentleman. I expect our room upstairs will look rather wrecky before I get that tiara.

					 						 Paula 						 Excuse the suggestion, perhaps your husband can’t afford it.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Oh, how dreadfully changed you are, Paula! Dodo can always mortgage something, or borrow of his ma. What is coming to you!

					 						 Paula 						 Ah!

					 						 						 							She sits at the piano and touches the keys.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Oh, yes, do play! That’s the one thing I envy you for.

					 						 Paula 						 What shall I play?

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 What was that heavenly piece you gave us last night, dear?

					 						 Paula 						 A bit of Schubert. Would you like to hear it again?

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 You don’t know any comic songs, do you?

					 						 Paula 						 I’m afraid not.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 I leave it to you, then.

					 						 						 							Paula plays. Aubrey and Cayley Drummle appear outside the window; they look into the room.

					 						 Aubrey 						 To Drummle. You can see her face in that mirror. Poor girl, how ill and wretched she looks.

					 						 Drummle 						 When are the Orreyeds going?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Heaven knows!

					 						 						 							Entering the room.

					 						 Drummle 						 But you’re entertaining them; what’s it to do with Heaven?

					 						 						 							Following Aubrey.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Do you know, Cayley, that even the Orreyeds serve a useful purpose? My wife actually speaks to me before our guests⁠—think of that! I’ve come to rejoice at the presence of the Orreyeds!

					 						 Drummle 						 I daresay; we’re taught that beetles are sent for a benign end.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Cayley, talk to Paula again tonight.

					 						 Drummle 						 Certainly, if I get the chance.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Let’s contrive it. George is asleep; perhaps I can get that doll out of the way. As they advance into the room, Paula abruptly ceases playing and finds interest in a volume of music. Sir George is now nodding and snoring apoplectically. Lady Orreyed, whenever you feel inclined for a game of billiards I’m at your service.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Jumping up. Charmed, I’m sure! I really thought you’d forgotten poor little me. Oh, look at Dodo!

					 						 Aubrey 						 No, no, don’t wake him; he’s tired.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 I must, he looks so plain. Rousing Sir George. Dodo! Dodo!

					 						 Sir George 						 Stupidly. ’Ullo!

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Dodo, dear, you were snoring.

					 						 Sir George 						 Oh, I say, you could ’a told me that by-and-by.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You want a cigar, George; come into the billiard room. Giving his arm to Lady Orreyed. Cayley, bring Paula.

					 						 						 							Aubrey and Lady Orreyed go out.

					 						 Sir George 						 Rising. Hey, what! billiard room! Looking at his watch. How goes the⁠—? Phew! ’Ullo, ’Ullo! Whisky and potass!

					 						 						 							He goes rapidly after Aubrey and Lady Orreyed. Paula resumes playing.

					 						 Paula 						 After a pause. Don’t moon about after me, Cayley; follow the others.

					 						 Drummle 						 Thanks, by-and-by. Sitting. That’s pretty.

					 						 Paula 						 After another pause, still playing. I wish you wouldn’t stare so.

					 						 Drummle 						 Was I staring? I’m sorry. She plays a little longer, then stops suddenly, rises, and goes to the window, where she stands looking out. Drummle moves from the ottoman to the settee. A lovely night.

					 						 Paula 						 Startled. Oh! Without turning to him. Why do you hop about like a monkey?

					 						 Drummle 						 Hot rooms play the deuce with the nerves. Now, it would have done you good to have walked in the garden with us after dinner and made merry. Why didn’t you?

					 						 Paula 						 You know why.

					 						 Drummle 						 Ah, you’re thinking of the⁠—difference between you and Aubrey?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes, I am thinking of it.

					 						 Drummle 						 Well, so am I. How long⁠—?

					 						 Paula 						 Getting on for three weeks.

					 						 Drummle 						 Bless me, it must be! And this would have been such a night to have healed it! Moonlight, the stars, the scent of flowers; and yet enough darkness to enable a kind woman to rest her hand for an instant on the arm of a good fellow who loves her. Ah, ha! it’s a wonderful power, dear Mrs. Aubrey, the power of an offended woman! Only realise it! Just that one touch⁠—the mere tips of her fingers⁠—and, for herself and another, she changes the colour of the whole world!

					 						 Paula 						 Turning to him, calmly. Cayley, my dear man, you talk exactly like a very romantic old lady.

					 						 						 							She leaves the window and sits playing with the knickknacks on the table.

					 						 Drummle 						 To himself. H’m, that hasn’t done it! Well⁠—ha, ha!⁠—I accept the suggestion. An old woman, eh?

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, I didn’t intend⁠—

					 						 Drummle 						 But why not? I’ve every qualification⁠—well, almost. And I confess it would have given this withered bosom a throb of grandmotherly satisfaction if I could have seen you and Aubrey at peace before I take my leave tomorrow.

					 						 Paula 						 Tomorrow, Cayley!

					 						 Drummle 						 I must.

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, this house is becoming unendurable.

					 						 Drummle 						 You’re very kind. But you’ve got the Orreyeds.

					 						 Paula 						 Fiercely. The Orreyeds! I⁠—I hate the Orreyeds! I lie awake at night, hating them!

					 						 Drummle 						 Pardon me, I’ve understood that their visit is, in some degree, owing to⁠—hem!⁠—your suggestion.

					 						 Paula 						 Heavens! that doesn’t make me like them better. Somehow or another, I⁠—I’ve outgrown these people. This woman⁠—I used to think her “jolly!”⁠—sickens me. I can’t breathe when she’s near me: the whiff of her handkerchief turns me faint! And she patronises me by the hour, until I⁠—I feel my nails growing longer with every word she speaks!

					 						 Drummle 						 My dear lady, why on earth don’t you say all this to Aubrey?

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, I’ve been such an utter fool, Cayley!

					 						 Drummle 						 Soothingly. Well, well, mention it to Aubrey!

					 						 Paula 						 No, no, you don’t understand. What do you think I’ve done?

					 						 Drummle 						 Done! What, since you invited the Orreyeds?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes; I must tell you⁠—

					 						 Drummle 						 Perhaps you’d better not.

					 						 Paula 						 Look here. I’ve intercepted some letters from Mrs. Cortelyon and Ellean to⁠—him. Producing three unopened letters from the bodice of her dress. There are the accursed things! From Paris⁠—two from the Cortelyon woman, the other from Ellean!

					 						 Drummle 						 But why⁠—why?

					 						 Paula 						 I don’t know. Yes, I do! I saw letters coming from Ellean to her father; not a line to me⁠—not a line. And one morning it happened I was downstairs before he was, and I spied this one lying with his heap on the breakfast-table, and I slipped it into my pocket⁠—out of malice, Cayley, pure devilry! And a day or two afterwards I met Elwes the postman at the Lodge, and took the letters from him, and found these others amongst ’em. I felt simply fiendish when I saw them⁠—fiendish! Returning the letters to her bodice. And now I carry them about with me, and they’re scorching me like a mustard plaster!

					 						 Drummle 						 Oh, this accounts for Aubrey not hearing from Paris lately!

					 						 Paula 						 That’s an ingenious conclusion to arrive at! Of course it does! With an hysterical laugh. Ha, ha!

					 						 Drummle 						 Well, well! Laughing. Ha, ha, ha!

					 						 Paula 						 Turning upon him. I suppose it is amusing!

					 						 Drummle 						 I beg pardon.

					 						 Paula 						 Heaven knows I’ve little enough to brag about! I’m a bad lot, but not in mean tricks of this sort. In all my life this is the most caddish thing I’ve done. How am I to get rid of these letters⁠—that’s what I want to know? How am I to get rid of them?

					 						 Drummle 						 If I were you I should take Aubrey aside and put them into his hands as soon as possible.

					 						 Paula 						 What! and tell him to his face that I⁠—! No, thank you. I suppose you wouldn’t like to⁠—

					 						 Drummle 						 No, no; I won’t touch ’em!

					 						 Paula 						 And you call yourself my friend?

					 						 Drummle 						 Good-humouredly. No, I don’t!

					 						 Paula 						 Perhaps I’ll tie them together and give them to his man in the morning.

					 						 Drummle 						 That won’t avoid an explanation.

					 						 Paula 						 Recklessly. Oh, then he must miss them⁠—

					 						 Drummle 						 And trace them.

					 						 Paula 						 Throwing herself upon the ottoman. I don’t care!

					 						 Drummle 						 I know you don’t; but let me send him to you now, may I?

					 						 Paula 						 Now! What do you think a woman’s made of? I couldn’t stand it, Cayley. I haven’t slept for nights; and last night there was thunder, too! I believe I’ve got the horrors.

					 						 Drummle 						 Taking the little hand-mirror from the table. You’ll sleep well enough when you deliver those letters. Come, come, Mrs. Aubrey⁠—a good night’s rest! Holding the mirror before her face. It’s quite time.

					 						 						 							She looks at herself for a moment, then snatches the mirror from him.

					 						 Paula 						 You brute, Cayley, to show me that!

					 						 Drummle 						 Then⁠—may I? Be guided by a fr⁠—a poor old woman! May I?

					 						 Paula 						 You’ll kill me, amongst you!

					 						 Drummle 						 What do you say?

					 						 Paula 						 After a pause. Very well. He nods his head and goes out rapidly. She looks after him for a moment, and calls “Cayley! Cayley!” Then she again produces the letters, deliberately, one by one, fingering them with aversion. Suddenly she starts, turning her head towards the door. Ah!

					 						 						 							Aubrey enters quickly.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 Handing him the letters, her face averted. There! He examines the letters, puzzled, and looks at her inquiringly. They are many days old. I stole them, I suppose to make you anxious and unhappy.

					 						 						 							He looks at the letters again, then lays them aside on the table.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Gently. Paula, dear, it doesn’t matter.

					 						 Paula 						 After a short pause. Why⁠—why do you take it like this?

					 						 Aubrey 						 What did you expect?

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, but I suppose silent reproaches are really the severest. And then, naturally, you are itching to open your letters.

					 						 						 							She crosses the room as if to go.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula! She pauses. Surely, surely it’s all over now?

					 						 Paula 						 All over! Mockingly. Has my stepdaughter returned then? When did she arrive? I haven’t heard of it!

					 						 Aubrey 						 You can be very cruel.

					 						 Paula 						 That word’s always on a man’s lips; he uses it if his soup’s cold. With another movement as if to go. Need we⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 I know I’ve wounded you, Paula. But isn’t there any way out of this?

					 						 Paula 						 When does Ellean return? Tomorrow? Next week?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Wearily. Oh! Why should we grudge Ellean the little pleasure she is likely to find in Paris and in London.

					 						 Paula 						 I grudge her nothing, if that’s a hit at me. But with that woman⁠—!

					 						 Aubrey 						 It must be that woman or another. You know that at present we are unable to give Ellean the opportunity of⁠—of⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Of mixing with respectable people.

					 						 Aubrey 						 The opportunity of gaining friends, experience, ordinary knowledge of the world. If you are interested in Ellean, can’t you see how useful Mrs. Cortelyon’s good offices are?

					 						 Paula 						 May I put one question? At the end of the London season, when Mrs. Cortelyon has done with Ellean, is it quite understood that the girl comes back to us? Aubrey is silent. Is it? Is it?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Let us wait till the end of the season⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Oh! I knew it. You’re only fooling me; you put me off with any trash. I believe you’ve sent Ellean away, not for the reasons you give, but because you don’t consider me a decent companion for her, because you’re afraid she might get a little of her innocence rubbed off in my company? Come, isn’t that the truth? Be honest! Isn’t that it?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes.

					 						 						 							There is a moment’s silence on both sides.

					 						 Paula 						 With uplifted hands as if to strike him. Oh!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Taking her by the wrists. Sit down. Sit down. He puts her into a chair; she shakes herself free with a cry. Now listen to me. Fond as you are, Paula, of harking back to your past, there’s one chapter of it you always let alone. I’ve never asked you to speak of it; you’ve never offered to speak of it. I mean the chapter that relates to the time when you were⁠—like Ellean. She attempts to rise; he restrains her. No, no.

					 						 Paula 						 I don’t choose to talk about that time. I won’t satisfy your curiosity.

					 						 Aubrey 						 My dear Paula, I have no curiosity⁠—I know what you were at Ellean’s age. I’ll tell you. You hadn’t a thought that wasn’t a wholesome one, you hadn’t an impulse that didn’t tend towards good, you never harboured a notion you couldn’t have gossiped about to a parcel of children. She makes another effort to rise: he lays his hand lightly on her shoulder. And this was a very few years back⁠—there are days now when you look like a schoolgirl⁠—but think of the difference between the two Paulas. You’ll have to think hard, because after a cruel life one’s perceptions grow a thick skin. But, for God’s sake, do think till you get these two images clearly in your mind, and then ask yourself what sort of a friend such a woman as you are today would have been for the girl of seven or eight years ago.

					 						 Paula 						 Rising. How dare you? I could be almost as good a friend to Ellean as her own mother would have been had she lived. I know what you mean. How dare you?

					 						 Aubrey 						 You say that; very likely you believe it. But you’re blind, Paula; you’re blind. You! Every belief that a young, pure-minded girl holds sacred⁠—that you once held sacred⁠—you now make a target for a jest, a sneer, a paltry cynicism. I tell you, you’re not mistress any longer of your thoughts or your tongue. Why, how often, sitting between you and Ellean, have I seen her cheeks turn scarlet as you’ve rattled off some tale that belongs by right to the club or the smoking-room! Have you noticed the blush? If you have, has the cause of it ever struck you? And this is the girl you say you love, I admit that you do love, whose love you expect in return! Oh, Paula, I make the best, the only, excuse for you when I tell you you’re blind!

					 						 Paula 						 Ellean⁠—Ellean blushes easily.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You blushed as easily a few years ago.

					 						 Paula 						 After a short pause. Well! Have you finished your sermon?

					 						 Aubrey 						 With a gesture of despair. Oh, Paula!

					 						 						 							Going up to the window and standing with his back to the room.

					 						 Paula 						 To herself. A few⁠—years ago! She walks slowly towards the door, then suddenly drops upon the ottoman in a paroxysm of weeping. O God! A few years ago!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Going to her. Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 Sobbing. Oh, don’t touch me!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, go away from me! He goes back a few steps, and after a little while she becomes calmer and rises unsteadily; then in an altered tone. Look here⁠—! He advances a step; she checks him with a quick gesture. Look here! Get rid of these people⁠—Mabel and her husband⁠—as soon as possible! I⁠—I’ve done with them!

					 						 Aubrey 						 In a whisper. Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 And then⁠—then⁠—when the time comes for Ellean to leave Mrs. Cortelyon, give me⁠—give me another chance! He advances again, but she shrinks away. No, no!

					 						 						 							She goes out by the door on the right. He sinks on to the settee, covering his eyes with his hands. There is a brief silence, then a Servant enters.

					 						 Servant 						 Mrs. Cortelyon, sir, with Miss Ellean.

					 						 						 							Aubrey rises to meet Mrs. Cortelyon, who enters, followed by Ellean, both being in travelling dresses. The Servant withdraws.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Shaking hands with Aubrey. Oh, my dear Aubrey!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Mrs. Cortelyon! Kissing Ellean. Ellean dear!

					 						 Ellean 						 Papa, is all well at home?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 We’re shockingly anxious.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes, yes, all’s well. This is quite unexpected. To Mrs. Cortelyon. You’ve found Paris insufferably hot?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Insufferably hot! Paris is pleasant enough. We’ve had no letter from you!

					 						 Aubrey 						 I wrote to Ellean a week ago.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Without alluding to the subject I had written to you upon.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Thinking. Ah, of course⁠—

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 And since then we’ve both written and you’ve been absolutely silent. Oh, it’s too bad!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Picking up the letters from the table. It isn’t altogether my fault. Here are the letters⁠—

					 						 Ellean 						 Papa!

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 They’re unopened.

					 						 Aubrey 						 An accident delayed their reaching me till this evening. I’m afraid this has upset you very much.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Upset me!

					 						 Ellean 						 In an undertone to Mrs. Cortelyon. Never mind. Not now, dear⁠—not tonight.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Eh?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 To Ellean aloud. Child, run away and take your things off. She doesn’t look as if she’d journeyed from Paris today.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I’ve never seen her with such a colour.

					 						 						 							Taking Ellean’s hands.

					 						 Ellean 						 To Aubrey, in a faint voice. Papa, Mrs. Cortelyon has been so very, very kind to me, but I⁠—I have come home.

					 						 						 							She goes out.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Come home! To Mrs. Cortelyon. Ellean returns to us, then?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 That’s the very point I put to you in my letters, and you oblige me to travel from Paris to Willowmere on a warm day to settle it. I think perhaps it’s right that Ellean should be with you just now, although I⁠—My dear friend, circumstances are a little altered.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Alice, you’re in some trouble.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Well⁠—yes, I am in trouble. You remember pretty little Mrs. Brereton who was once Caroline Ardale?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Quite well.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 She’s a widow now, poor thing. She has the entresol of the house where we’ve been lodging in the Avenue de Friedland. Caroline’s a dear chum of mine; she formed a great liking for Ellean.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I’m very glad.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Yes, it’s nice for her to meet her mother’s friends. Er⁠—that young Hugh Ardale the papers were full of some time ago⁠—he’s Caroline Brereton’s brother, you know.

					 						 Aubrey 						 No, I didn’t know. What did he do? I forget.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Checked one of those horrid mutinies at some faraway station in India, marched down with a handful of his men and a few faithful natives, and held the place until he was relieved. They gave him his company and a V.C. for it.

					 						 Aubrey 						 And he’s Mrs. Brereton’s brother?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Yes. He’s with his sister⁠—was, rather⁠—in Paris. He’s home⁠—invalided. Good gracious, Aubrey, why don’t you help me out? Can’t you guess what has occurred?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Alice!

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Young Ardale⁠—Ellean!

					 						 Aubrey 						 An attachment?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Yes, Aubrey. After a little pause. Well, I suppose I’ve got myself into sad disgrace. But really I didn’t foresee anything of this kind. A serious, reserved child like Ellean, and a boyish, high-spirited soldier⁠—it never struck me as being likely. Aubrey paces to and fro thoughtfully. I did all I could directly Captain Ardale spoke⁠—wrote to you at once. Why on earth don’t you receive your letters promptly, and when you do get them why can’t you open them? I endured the anxiety till last night, and then made up my mind⁠—home! Of course, it has worried me terribly. My head’s bursting. Are there any salts about? Aubrey fetches a bottle from the cabinet and hands it to her. We’ve had one of those hateful smooth crossings that won’t let you be properly indisposed.

					 						 Aubrey 						 My dear Alice, I assure you I’ve no thought of blaming you.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 That statement always precedes a quarrel.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I don’t know whether this is the worst or the best luck. How will my wife regard it? Is Captain Ardale a good fellow?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 My dear Aubrey, you’d better read up the accounts of his wonderful heroism. Face to face with death for a whole week; always with a smile and a cheering word for the poor helpless souls depending on him! Of course, it’s that that has stirred the depths of your child’s nature. I’ve watched her while we’ve been dragging the story out of him, and if angels look different from Ellean at that moment, I don’t desire to meet any, that’s all!

					 						 Aubrey 						 If you were in my position⁠—? But you can’t judge.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Why, if I had a marriageable daughter of my own and Captain Ardale proposed for her, naturally I should cry my eyes out all night⁠—but I should thank Heaven in the morning.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You believe so thoroughly in him?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Do you think I should have only a headache at this minute if I didn’t! Look here, you’ve got to see me down the lane; that’s the least you can do, my friend. Come into my house for a moment and shake hands with Hugh.

					 						 Aubrey 						 What, is he here?

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 He came through with us, to present himself formally tomorrow. Where are my gloves? Aubrey fetches them from the ottoman. Make my apologies to Mrs. Tanqueray, please. She’s well, I hope? Going towards the door. I can’t feel sorry she hasn’t seen me in this condition.

					 						 						 							Ellean enters.

					 						 Ellean 						 To Mrs. Cortelyon. I’ve been waiting to wish you good night. I was afraid I’d missed you.

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Good night, Ellean.

					 						 Ellean 						 In a low voice, embracing Mrs. Cortelyon. I can’t thank you. Dear Mrs. Cortelyon!

					 						 Mrs. Cortelyon 						 Her arms round Ellean, in a whisper to Aubrey. Speak a word to her.

					 						 						 							Mrs. Cortelyon goes out.

					 						 Aubrey 						 To Ellean. Ellean, I’m going to see Mrs. Cortelyon home. Tell Paula where I am; explain, dear.

					 						 						 							Going to the door.

					 						 Ellean 						 Her head drooping. Yes. Quickly. Father! You are angry with me⁠—disappointed?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Angry?⁠—no.

					 						 Ellean 						 Disappointed?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Smiling and going to her and taking her hand. If so, it’s only because you’ve shaken my belief in my discernment. I thought you took after your poor mother a little, Ellean; but there’s a look on your face tonight, dear, that I never saw on hers⁠—never, never.

					 						 Ellean 						 Leaning her head on his shoulder. Perhaps I ought not to have gone away?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Hush! You’re quite happy?

					 						 Ellean 						 Yes.

					 						 Aubrey 						 That’s right. Then, as you are quite happy there is something I particularly want you to do for me Ellean.

					 						 Ellean 						 What is that?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Be very gentle with Paula. Will you?

					 						 Ellean 						 You think I have been unkind.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Kissing her upon the forehead. Be very gentle with Paula.

					 						 						 							He goes out and she stands looking after him, then, as she turns thoughtfully from the door, a rose is thrown through the window and falls at her feet. She picks up the flower wonderingly and goes to the window.

					 						 Ellean 						 Starting back. Hugh!

					 						 						 							Hugh Ardale, a handsome young man of about seven-and-twenty, with a boyish face and manner, appears outside the window.

					 						 Hugh 						 Nelly! Nelly dear!

					 						 Ellean 						 What’s the matter?

					 						 Hugh 						 Hush! Nothing. It’s only fun. Laughing. Ha, ha, ha! I’ve found out that Mrs. Cortelyon’s meadow runs up to your father’s plantation; I’ve come through a gap in the hedge.

					 						 Ellean 						 Why, Hugh?

					 						 Hugh 						 I’m miserable at The Warren; it’s so different from the Avenue de Friedland. Don’t look like that! Upon my word I meant just to peep at your home and go back, but I saw figures moving about here, and came nearer, hoping to get a glimpse of you. Was that your father?

					 						 						 							Entering the room.

					 						 Ellean 						 Yes.

					 						 Hugh 						 Isn’t this fun! A rabbit ran across my foot while I was hiding behind that old yew.

					 						 Ellean 						 You must go away; it’s not right for you to be here like this.

					 						 Hugh 						 But it’s only fun, I tell you. You take everything so seriously. Do wish me good night.

					 						 Ellean 						 We have said good night.

					 						 Hugh 						 In the hall at The Warren before Mrs. Cortelyon and a manservant. Oh, it’s so different from the Avenue de Friedland!

					 						 Ellean 						 Giving him her hand hastily. Good night, Hugh.

					 						 Hugh 						 Is that all? We might be the merest acquaintances.

					 						 						 							He momentarily embraces her, but she releases herself.

					 						 Ellean 						 It’s when you’re like this that you make me feel utterly miserable. Throwing the rose from her angrily. Oh!

					 						 Hugh 						 I’ve offended you now, I suppose?

					 						 Ellean 						 Yes.

					 						 Hugh 						 Forgive me, Nelly. Come into the garden for five minutes; we’ll stroll down to the plantation.

					 						 Ellean 						 No, no.

					 						 Hugh 						 For two minutes⁠—to tell me you forgive me.

					 						 Ellean 						 I forgive you.

					 						 Hugh 						 Evidently. I shan’t sleep a wink tonight after this. What a fool I am! Come down to the plantation. Make it up with me.

					 						 Ellean 						 There is somebody coming into this room. Do you wish to be seen here?

					 						 Hugh 						 I shall wait for you behind that yew tree. You must speak to me. Nelly!

					 						 						 							He disappears. Paula enters.

					 						 Paula 						 Ellean!

					 						 Ellean 						 You⁠—you are very surprised to see me, Paula, of course.

					 						 Paula 						 Why are you here? Why aren’t you with⁠—your friend?

					 						 Ellean 						 I’ve come home⁠—if you’ll have me. We left Paris this morning; Mrs. Cortelyon brought me back. She was here a minute or two ago; papa has just gone with her to The Warren. He asked me to tell you.

					 						 Paula 						 There are some people staying with us that I’d rather you didn’t meet. It was hardly worth your while to return for a few hours.

					 						 Ellean 						 A few hours?

					 						 Paula 						 Well, when do you go to London?

					 						 Ellean 						 I don’t think I go to London, after all.

					 						 Paula 						 Eagerly. You⁠—you’ve quarrelled with her?

					 						 Ellean 						 No, no, no, not that; but⁠—Paula! In an altered tone. Paula.

					 						 Paula 						 Startled. Eh? Ellean goes deliberately to Paula and kisses her. Ellean!

					 						 Ellean 						 Kiss me.

					 						 Paula 						 What⁠—what’s come to you?

					 						 Ellean 						 I want to behave differently to you in the future. Is it too late?

					 						 Paula 						 Too⁠—late! Impulsively kissing Ellean and crying. No⁠—no⁠—no! No⁠—no!

					 						 Ellean 						 Paula, don’t cry.

					 						 Paula 						 Wiping her eyes. I’m a little shaky; I haven’t been sleeping. It’s all right⁠—talk to me.

					 						 Ellean 						 There is something I want to tell you⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Is there⁠—is there?

					 						 						 							They sit together on the ottoman, Paula taking Ellean’s hand.

					 						 Ellean 						 Paula, in our house in the Avenue de Friedland, on the floor below us, there was a Mrs. Brereton. She used to be a friend of my mother’s. Mrs. Cortelyon and I spent a great deal of our time with her.

					 						 Paula 						 Suspiciously. Oh! Letting Ellean’s hand fall. Is this lady going to take you up in place of Mrs. Cortelyon?

					 						 Ellean 						 No, no. Her brother is staying with her⁠—was staying with her. Her brother⁠—

					 						 						 							Breaking off in confusion.

					 						 Paula 						 Well?

					 						 Ellean 						 Almost inaudibly. Paula⁠—

					 						 						 							She rises and walks away, Paula following her.

					 						 Paula 						 Ellean! Taking hold of her. You’re not in love!

					 						 						 							Ellean looks at Paula appealingly.

					 						 Paula 						 Oh! You in love! You! Oh, this is why you’ve come home! Of course, you can make friends with me now! You’ll leave us for good soon, I suppose; so it doesn’t much matter being civil to me for a little while!

					 						 Ellean 						 Oh, Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 Why, how you have deceived us⁠—all of us! We’ve taken you for a cold-blooded little saint. The fools you’ve made of us! Saint Ellean! Saint Ellean!

					 						 Ellean 						 Ah, I might have known you’d only mock me!

					 						 Paula 						 Her tone changing. Eh?

					 						 Ellean 						 I⁠—I can’t talk to you. Sitting on the settee. You do nothing else but mock and sneer, nothing else.

					 						 Paula 						 Ellean dear! Ellean! I didn’t mean it. I’m so horribly jealous, it’s a sort of curse on me. Kneeling beside Ellean and embracing her. My tongue runs away with me. I’m going to alter, I swear I am. I’ve made some good resolutions, and, as God’s above me, I’ll keep them! If you are in love, if you do ever marry, that’s no reason why we shouldn’t be fond of each other. Come, you’ve kissed me of your own accord⁠—you can’t take it back. Now we’re friends again, aren’t we? Ellean dear! I want to know everything, everything. Ellean dear, Ellean!

					 						 Ellean 						 Paula, Hugh has done something that makes me very angry. He came with us from Paris today, to see papa. He is staying with Mrs. Cortelyon and⁠—I ought to tell you⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Yes, yes. What?

					 						 Ellean 						 He has found his way by The Warren meadow through the plantation up to this house. He is waiting to bid me good night. Glancing towards the garden. He is⁠—out there.

					 						 Paula 						 Oh!

					 						 Ellean 						 What shall I do?

					 						 Paula 						 Bring him in to see me! Will you?

					 						 Ellean 						 No, no.

					 						 Paula 						 But I’m dying to know him. Oh, yes, you must. I shall meet him before Aubrey does. Excitedly running her hands over her hair. I’m so glad. Ellean goes out by the window. The mirror⁠—mirror. What a fright I must look! Not finding the hand-glass on the table, she jumps on to the settee, and surveys herself in the mirror over the mantelpiece, then sits quietly down and waits. Ellean! Just fancy! Ellean!

					 						 						 							After a pause Ellean enters by the window with Hugh.

					 						 Ellean 						 Paula, this is Captain Ardale⁠—Mrs. Tanqueray.

					 						 						 							Paula risen and turns, and she and Hugh stand staring blankly at each other for a moment or two; then Paula advances and gives him her hand.

					 						 Paula 						 In a strange voice, but calmly. How do you do?

					 						 Hugh 						 How do you do?

					 						 Paula 						 To Ellean. Mr. Ardale and I have met in London, Ellean. Er⁠—Captain Ardale, now?

					 						 Hugh 						 Yes.

					 						 Ellean 						 In London?

					 						 Paula 						 They say the world’s very small, don’t they?

					 						 Hugh 						 Yes.

					 						 Paula 						 Ellean, dear, I want to have a little talk about you to Mr. Ardale⁠—Captain Ardale⁠—alone. Putting her arms round Ellean, and leading her to the door. Come back in a little while. Ellean nods to Paula with a smile and goes out, while Paula stands watching her at the open door. In a little while⁠—in a little⁠—Closing the door and then taking a seat facing Hugh. Be quick! Mr. Tanqueray has only gone down to The Warren with Mrs. Cortelyon. What is to be done?

					 						 Hugh 						 Blankly. Done?

					 						 Paula 						 Done⁠—done. Something must be done.

					 						 Hugh 						 I understood that Mr. Tanqueray had married a Mrs.⁠—Mrs.⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Jarman?

					 						 Hugh 						 Yes.

					 						 Paula 						 I’d been going by that name. You didn’t follow my doings after we separated.

					 						 Hugh 						 No.

					 						 Paula 						 Sneeringly. No.

					 						 Hugh 						 I went out to India.

					 						 Paula 						 What’s to be done?

					 						 Hugh 						 Damn this chance!

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, my God!

					 						 Hugh 						 Your husband doesn’t know, does he?

					 						 Paula 						 That you and I⁠—?

					 						 Hugh 						 Yes.

					 						 Paula 						 No. He knows about others.

					 						 Hugh 						 Not about me. How long were we⁠—?

					 						 Paula 						 I don’t remember, exactly.

					 						 Hugh 						 Do you⁠—do you think it matters?

					 						 Paula 						 His⁠—his daughter. With a muttered exclamation he turns away and sits with his head in his hands. What’s to be done?

					 						 Hugh 						 I wish I could think.

					 						 Paula 						 Oh! Oh! What happened to that flat of ours in Ethelbert Street?

					 						 Hugh 						 I let it.

					 						 Paula 						 All that pretty furniture?

					 						 Hugh 						 Sold it.

					 						 Paula 						 I came across the key of the escritoire the other day in an old purse! Suddenly realising the horror and hopelessness of her position, and starting to her feet with an hysterical cry of rage. What am I maundering about?

					 						 Hugh 						 For God’s sake, be quiet! Do let me think.

					 						 Paula 						 This will send me mad! Suddenly turning and standing over him. You⁠—you beast, to crop up in my life again like this!

					 						 Hugh 						 I always treated you fairly.

					 						 Paula 						 Weakly. Oh! I beg your pardon⁠—I know you did⁠—I⁠—

					 						 						 							She sinks on to the settee, crying hysterically.

					 						 Hugh 						 Hush!

					 						 Paula 						 She kissed me tonight! I’d won her over! I’ve had such a fight to make her love me! And now⁠—just as she’s beginning to love me, to bring this on her!

					 						 Hugh 						 Hush, hush! Don’t break down!

					 						 Paula 						 Sobbing. You don’t know! I⁠—I haven’t been getting on well in my marriage. It’s been my fault. The life I used to lead spoilt me completely. But I’d made up my mind to turn over a new life from tonight. From tonight!

					 						 Hugh 						 Paula⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Don’t you call me that!

					 						 Hugh 						 Mrs. Tanqueray, there is no cause for you to despair in this way. It’s all right, I tell you⁠—it shall be all right.

					 						 Paula 						 Shivering. What are we to do?

					 						 Hugh 						 Hold our tongues.

					 						 Paula 						 Eh?

					 						 						 							Staring vacantly.

					 						 Hugh 						 The chances are a hundred to one against anyone ever turning up who knew us when we were together. Besides, no one would be such a brute as to split on us. If anybody did do such a thing we should have to lie! What are we upsetting ourselves like this for, when we’ve simply got to hold our tongues?

					 						 Paula 						 You’re as mad as I am!

					 						 Hugh 						 Can you think of a better plan?

					 						 Paula 						 There’s only one plan possible⁠—let’s come to our senses!⁠—Mr. Tanqueray must be told.

					 						 Hugh 						 Your husband! What, and I lose Ellean! I lose Ellean!

					 						 Paula 						 You’ve got to lose her.

					 						 Hugh 						 I won’t lose her! I can’t lose her!

					 						 Paula 						 Didn’t I read of your doing any number of brave things in India? Why, you seem to be an awful coward!

					 						 Hugh 						 That’s another sort of pluck altogether; I haven’t this sort of pluck.

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, I don’t ask you to tell Mr. Tanqueray. That’s my job.

					 						 Hugh 						 Standing over her. You⁠—you⁠—you’d better! You⁠—!

					 						 Paula 						 Rising. Don’t bully me! I intend to.

					 						 Hugh 						 Taking hold of her; she wrenches herself free. Look here, Paula! I never treated you badly⁠—you’ve owned it. Why should you want to pay me out like this? You don’t know how I love Ellean!

					 						 Paula 						 Yes, that’s just what I do know.

					 						 Hugh 						 I say you don’t! She’s as good as my own mother. I’ve been downright honest with her too. I told her, in Paris, that I’d been a bit wild at one time, and, after a damned wretched day, she promised to forgive me because of what I’d done since in India. She’s behaved like an angel to me! Surely I oughtn’t to lose her, after all, just because I’ve been like other fellows! No; I haven’t been half as rackety as a hundred men we could think of. Paula, don’t pay me out for nothing; be fair to me, there’s a good girl⁠—be fair to me!

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, I’m not considering you at all! I advise you not to stay here any longer; Mr. Tanqueray is sure to be back soon.

					 						 Hugh 						 Taking up his hat. What’s the understanding between us then? What have we arranged to do?

					 						 Paula 						 I don’t know what you’re going to do; I’ve got to tell Mr. Tanqueray.

					 						 Hugh 						 By God, you shall do nothing of the sort!

					 						 						 							Approaching her fiercely.

					 						 Paula 						 You shocking coward!

					 						 Hugh 						 If you dare! Going up to the window. Mind! If you dare!

					 						 Paula 						 Following him. Why, what would you do?

					 						 Hugh 						 After a short pause, sullenly. Nothing. I’d shoot myself⁠—that’s nothing. Good night.

					 						 Paula 						 Good night.

					 						 						 							He disappears. She walks unsteadily to the ottoman, and sits; and as she does so her hand falls upon the little silver mirror, which she takes up, staring at her own reflection.





Act IV


			The Drawing room at “Highercoombe,” the same evening.

			 				 					 						 						 Paula is still seated on the ottoman, looking vacantly before her, with the little mirror in her hand. Lady Orreyed enters.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 There you are! You never came into the billiard room. Isn’t it maddening⁠—Cayley Drummle gives me sixty out of a hundred and beats me. I must be out of form, because I know I play remarkably well for a lady. Only last month⁠—Paula rises. Whatever is the matter with you, old girl?

					 						 Paula 						 Why?

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Staring. It’s the light, I suppose. Paula replaces the mirror on the table. By Aubrey’s bolting from the billiard table in that fashion I thought perhaps⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Yes; it’s all right.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 You’ve patched it up? Paula nods. Oh, I am jolly glad⁠—! I mean⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Yes, I know what you mean. Thanks, Mabel.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Kissing Paula. Now take my advice; for the future⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Mabel, if I’ve been disagreeable to you while you’ve been staying here, I⁠—I beg your pardon.

					 						 						 							Walking away and sitting down.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 You disagreeable, my dear? I haven’t noticed it. Dodo and me both consider you make a first-class hostess, but then you’ve had such practice, haven’t you? Dropping on to the ottoman and gaping. Oh, talk about being sleepy⁠—!

					 						 Paula 						 Why don’t you⁠—!

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Why, dear, I must hang about for Dodo. You may as well know it; he’s in one of his moods.

					 						 Paula 						 Under her breath. Oh⁠—!

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Now, it’s not his fault; it was deadly dull for him while we were playing billiards. Cayley Drummle did ask him to mark, but I stopped that; it’s so easy to make a gentleman look like a billiard-marker. This is just how it always is; if poor old Dodo has nothing to do, he loses count, as you may say.

					 						 Paula 						 Hark!

					 						 						 							Sir George Orreyed enters, walking slowly and deliberately; he looks pale and watery-eyed.

					 						 Sir George 						 With mournful indistinctness. I’m ’fraid we’ve lef’ you a grea’ deal to yourself tonight, Mrs. Tanqueray. Attra’tions of billiards. I apol’gise. I say, where’s ol’ Aubrey?

					 						 Paula 						 My husband has been obliged to go out to a neighbour’s house.

					 						 Sir George 						 I want his advice on a rather pressing matter connected with my family⁠—my family. Sitting. Tomorrow will do just as well.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 To Paula. This is the mood I hate so⁠—drivelling about his precious family.

					 						 Sir George 						 The fact is, Mrs. Tanqueray, I am not easy in my min’ ’bout the way I am treatin’ my poor ol’ mother.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 To Paula. Do you hear that? That’s his mother, but my mother he won’t so much as look at!

					 						 Sir George 						 I shall write to Bruton Street firs’ thing in the morning.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 To Paula. Mamma has stuck to me through everything⁠—well, you know!

					 						 Sir George 						 I’ll get ol’ Aubrey to figure out a letter. I’ll drop line to Uncle Fitz too⁠—dooced shame of the ol’ feller to chuck me over in this manner. Wiping his eyes. All my family have chucked me over.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Rising. Dodo!

					 						 Sir George 						 Jus’ because I’ve married beneath me, to be chucked over! Aunt Lydia, the General, Hooky Whitgrave, Lady Sugnall⁠—my own dear sister!⁠—all turn their backs on me. It’s more than I can stan’!

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Approaching him with dignity. Sir George, wish Mrs. Tanqueray good night at once and come upstairs. Do you hear me?

					 						 Sir George 						 Rising angrily. Wha’⁠—

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Be quiet!

					 						 Sir George 						 You presoom to order me about!

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 You’re making an exhibition of yourself!

					 						 Sir George 						 Look ’ere⁠—!

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 Come along, I tell you!

					 						 						 							He hesitates, utters a few inarticulate sounds, then snatches up a fragile ornament from the table, and is about to dash it on to the ground. Lady Orreyed retreats, and Paula goes to him.

					 						 Paula 						 George!

					 						 						 							He replaces the ornament.

					 						 Sir George 						 Shaking Paula’s hand. Good ni’, Mrs. Tanqueray.

					 						 Lady Orreyed 						 To Paula. Good night, darling. Wish Aubrey good night for me. Now, Dodo?

					 						 						 							She goes out.

					 						 Sir George 						 To Paula. I say, are you goin’ to sit up for ol’ Aubrey?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes.

					 						 Sir George 						 Shall I keep you comp’ny?

					 						 Paula 						 No, thank you, George.

					 						 Sir George 						 Sure?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes, sure.

					 						 Sir George 						 Shaking hands. Good night again.

					 						 Paula 						 Good night.

					 						 						 							She turns away. He goes out, steadying himself carefully. Drummle appears outside the window, smoking.

					 						 Drummle 						 Looking into the room, and seeing Paula. My last cigar. Where’s Aubrey?

					 						 Paula 						 Gone down to The Warren, to see Mrs. Cortelyon home.

					 						 Drummle 						 Entering the room. Eh? Did you say Mrs. Cortelyon?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes. She has brought Ellean back.

					 						 Drummle 						 Bless my soul! Why?

					 						 Paula 						 I⁠—I’m too tired to tell you, Cayley. If you stroll along the lane you’ll meet Aubrey. Get the news from him.

					 						 Drummle 						 Going up to the window. Yes, yes. Returning to Paula. I don’t want to bother you, only⁠—the anxious old woman, you know. Are you and Aubrey⁠—?

					 						 Paula 						 Good friends again?

					 						 Drummle 						 Nodding. Um.

					 						 Paula 						 Giving him her hand. Quite, Cayley, quite.

					 						 Drummle 						 Retaining her hand. That’s capital. As I’m off so early tomorrow morning, let me say now⁠—thank you for your hospitality.

					 						 						 							He bends over her hand gallantly, then goes out by the window.

					 						 Paula 						 To herself. “Are you and Aubrey⁠—?” “Good friends again?” “Yes.” “Quite, Cayley, quite.”

					 						 						 							There is a brief pause, then Aubrey enters hurriedly, wearing a light overcoat and carrying a cap.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula dear! Have you seen Ellean?

					 						 Paula 						 I found her here when I came down.

					 						 Aubrey 						 She⁠—she’s told you?

					 						 Paula 						 Yes, Aubrey.

					 						 Aubrey 						 It’s extraordinary, isn’t it! Not that somebody should fall in love with Ellean or that Ellean herself should fall in love. All that’s natural enough and was bound to happen, I suppose, sooner or later. But this young fellow! You know his history?

					 						 Paula 						 His history?

					 						 Aubrey 						 You remember the papers were full of his name a few months ago?

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, yes.

					 						 Aubrey 						 The man’s as brave as a lion, there’s no doubt about that; and, at the same time, he’s like a big good-natured schoolboy, Mrs. Cortelyon says. Have you ever pictured the kind of man Ellean would marry some day?

					 						 Paula 						 I can’t say that I have.

					 						 Aubrey 						 A grave, sedate fellow I’ve thought about⁠—hah! She has fallen in love with the way in which Ardale practically laid down his life to save those poor people shut up in the Residency. Taking off his coat. Well, I suppose if a man can do that sort of thing, one ought to be content. And yet⁠—Throwing his coat on the settee. I should have met him tonight, but he’d gone out. Paula dear, tell me how you look upon this business.

					 						 Paula 						 Yes, I will⁠—I must. To begin with, I⁠—I’ve seen Mr. Ardale.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Captain Ardale?

					 						 Paula 						 Captain Ardale.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Seen him?

					 						 Paula 						 While you were away he came up here, through our grounds, to try to get a word with Ellean. I made her fetch him in and present him to me.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Frowning. Doesn’t Captain Ardale know there’s a lodge and a front door to this place? Never mind! What is your impression of him?

					 						 Paula 						 Aubrey, do you recollect my bringing you a letter⁠—a letter giving you an account of myself⁠—to the Albany late one night⁠—the night before we got married?

					 						 Aubrey 						 A letter?

					 						 Paula 						 You burnt it; don’t you know?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes; I know.

					 						 Paula 						 His name was in that letter.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Going back from her slowly, and staring at her. I don’t understand.

					 						 Paula 						 Well⁠—Ardale and I once kept house together. He remains silent, not moving. Why don’t you strike me? Hit me in the face⁠—I’d rather you did! Hurt me! hurt me!

					 						 Aubrey 						 After a pause. What did you⁠—and this man⁠—say to each other⁠—just now?

					 						 Paula 						 I⁠—hardly⁠—know.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Think!

					 						 Paula 						 The end of it all was that I⁠—I told him I must inform you of⁠—what had happened … he didn’t want me to do that … I declared that I would … he dared me to. Breaking down. Let me alone!⁠—oh!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Where was my daughter while this went on?

					 						 Paula 						 I⁠—I had sent her out of the room … that is all right.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes, yes⁠—yes, yes.

					 						 						 							He turns his head towards the door.

					 						 Paula 						 Who’s that?

					 						 						 							A Servant enters with a letter.

					 						 Servant 						 The coachman has just run up with this from The Warren, sir. Aubrey takes the letter. It’s for Mrs. Tanqueray, sir; there’s no answer.

					 						 						 							The Servant withdraws. Aubrey goes to Paula and drops the letter into her lap; she opens it with uncertain hands.

					 						 Paula 						 Reading it to herself. It’s from⁠—him. He’s going away⁠—or gone⁠—I think. Rising in a weak way. What does it say? I never could make out his writing.

					 						 						 							She gives the letter to Aubrey and stands near him, looking at the letter over his shoulder as he reads.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Reading. “I shall be in Paris by tomorrow evening. Shall wait there, at Meurice’s, for a week, ready to receive any communication you or your husband may address to me. Please invent some explanation to Ellean. Mrs. Tanqueray, for God’s sake, do what you can for me.”

					 						 						 							Paula and Aubrey speak in low voices, both still looking at the letter.

					 						 Paula 						 Has he left The Warren, I wonder, already?

					 						 Aubrey 						 That doesn’t matter.

					 						 Paula 						 No, but I can picture him going quietly off. Very likely he’s walking on to Bridgeford or Cottering tonight, to get the first train in the morning. A pleasant stroll for him.

					 						 Aubrey 						 We’ll reckon he’s gone, that’s enough.

					 						 Paula 						 That isn’t to be answered in any way?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Silence will answer that.

					 						 Paula 						 He’ll soon recover his spirits, I know.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You know. Offering her the letter. You don’t want this, I suppose?

					 						 Paula 						 No.

					 						 Aubrey 						 It’s done with⁠—done with.

					 						 						 							He tears the letter into small pieces. She has dropped the envelope; she searches for it, finds it, and gives it to him.

					 						 Paula 						 Here!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Looking at the remnants of the letter. This is no good; I must burn it.

					 						 Paula 						 Burn it in your room.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes.

					 						 Paula 						 Put it in your pocket for now.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes.

					 						 						 							He does so. Ellean enters and they both turn, guiltily, and stare at her.

					 						 Ellean 						 After a short silence, wonderingly. Papa⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 What do you want, Ellean?

					 						 Ellean 						 I heard from Willis that you had come in; I only want to wish you good night. Paula steals away, without looking back. What’s the matter? Ah! Of course, Paula has told you about Captain Ardale?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Well?

					 						 Ellean 						 Have you and he met?

					 						 Aubrey 						 No.

					 						 Ellean 						 You are angry with him; so was I. But tomorrow when he calls and expresses his regret⁠—tomorrow⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ellean⁠—Ellean!

					 						 Ellean 						 Yes, papa?

					 						 Aubrey 						 I⁠—I can’t let you see this man again. He walks away from her in a paroxysm of distress, then, after a moment or two, he returns to her and takes her to his arms. Ellean! my child!

					 						 Ellean 						 Releasing herself. What has happened, papa? What is it?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Thinking out his words deliberately. Something has occurred, something has come to my knowledge, in relation to Captain Ardale, which puts any further acquaintanceship between you two out of the question.

					 						 Ellean 						 Any further acquaintanceship … out of the question?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes.

					 						 						 							Advancing to her quickly, but she shrinks from him.

					 						 Ellean 						 No, no⁠—I am quite well. After a short pause. It’s not an hour ago since Mrs. Cortelyon left you and me together here; you had nothing to urge against Captain Ardale then.

					 						 Aubrey 						 No.

					 						 Ellean 						 You don’t know each other; you haven’t even seen him this evening. Father!

					 						 Aubrey 						 I have told you he and I have not met.

					 						 Ellean 						 Mrs. Cortelyon couldn’t have spoken against him to you just now. No, no, no; she’s too good a friend to both of us. Aren’t you going to give me some explanation? You can’t take this position towards me⁠—towards Captain Ardale⁠—without affording me the fullest explanation.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ellean, there are circumstances connected with Captain Ardale’s career which you had better remain ignorant of. It must be sufficient for you that I consider these circumstances render him unfit to be your husband.

					 						 Ellean 						 Father!

					 						 Aubrey 						 You must trust me, Ellean; you must try to understand the depth of my love for you and the⁠—the agony it gives me to hurt you. You must trust me.

					 						 Ellean 						 I will, father; but you must trust me a little too. Circumstances connected with Captain Ardale’s career?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes.

					 						 Ellean 						 When he presents himself here tomorrow of course you will see him and let him defend himself?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Captain Ardale will not be here tomorrow.

					 						 Ellean 						 Not! You have stopped his coming here?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Indirectly⁠—yes.

					 						 Ellean 						 But just now he was talking to me at that window! Nothing had taken place then! And since then nothing can have⁠—! Oh! Why⁠—you have heard something against him from Paula.

					 						 Aubrey 						 From⁠—Paula!

					 						 Ellean 						 She knows him.

					 						 Aubrey 						 She has told you so?

					 						 Ellean 						 When I introduced Captain Ardale to her she said she had met him in London. Of course! It is Paula who has done this!

					 						 Aubrey 						 In a hard voice. I⁠—I hope you⁠—you’ll refrain from rushing at conclusions. There’s nothing to be gained by trying to avoid the main point, which is that you must drive Captain Ardale out of your thoughts. Understand that! You’re able to obtain comfort from your religion, aren’t you? I’m glad to think that’s so. I talk to you in a harsh way, Ellean, but I feel your pain almost as acutely as you do. Going to the door. I⁠—I can’t say anything more to you tonight.

					 						 Ellean 						 Father! He pauses at the door. Father, I’m obliged to ask you this; there’s no help for it⁠—I’ve no mother to go to. Does what you have heard about Captain Ardale concern the time when he led a wild, a dissolute life in London?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Returning to her slowly and staring at her. Explain yourself!

					 						 Ellean 						 He has been quite honest with me. One day⁠—in Paris⁠—he confessed to me⁠—what a man’s life is⁠—what his life had been.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Under his breath. Oh!

					 						 Ellean 						 He offered to go away, not to approach me again.

					 						 Aubrey 						 And you⁠—you accepted his view of what a man’s life is!

					 						 Ellean 						 As far as I could forgive him, I forgave him.

					 						 Aubrey 						 With a groan. Why, when was it you left us? It hasn’t taken you long to get your robe “just a little dusty at the hem!”

					 						 Ellean 						 What do you mean?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Hah! A few weeks ago my one great desire was to keep you ignorant of evil.

					 						 Ellean 						 Father, it is impossible to be ignorant of evil. Instinct, common instinct, teaches us what is good and bad. Surely I am none the worse for knowing what is wicked and detesting it!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Detesting it! Why, you love this fellow!

					 						 Ellean 						 Ah, you don’t understand! I have simply judged Captain Ardale as we all pray to be judged. I have lived in imagination through that one week in India when he deliberately offered his life back to God to save those wretched, desperate people. In his whole career I see now nothing but that one week; those few hours bring him nearer the Saints, I believe, than fifty uneventful years of mere blamelessness would have done! And so, father, if Paula has reported anything to Captain Ardale’s discredit⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula⁠—!

					 						 Ellean 						 It must be Paula; it can’t be anybody else.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You⁠—you’ll please keep Paula out of the question. Finally, Ellean, understand me⁠—I have made up my mind.

					 						 						 							Again going to the door.

					 						 Ellean 						 But wait⁠—listen! I have made up my mind also.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ah! I recognise your mother in you now!

					 						 Ellean 						 You need not speak against my mother because you are angry with me!

					 						 Aubrey 						 I⁠—I hardly know what I’m saying to you. In the morning⁠—in the morning⁠—

					 						 						 							He goes out. She remains standing, and turns her head to listen. Then, after a moment’s hesitation she goes softly to the window, and looks out under the verandah.

					 						 Ellean 						 In a whisper. Paula! Paula!

					 						 						 							Paula appears outside the window and steps into the room; her face is white and drawn, her hair is a little disordered.

					 						 Paula 						 Huskily. Well?

					 						 Ellean 						 Have you been under the verandah all the while⁠—listening?

					 						 Paula 						 N⁠—no.

					 						 Ellean 						 You have overheard us⁠—I see you have. And it is you who have been speaking to my father against Captain Ardale. Isn’t it? Paula, why don’t you own it or deny it?

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, I⁠—I don’t mind owning it; why should I?

					 						 Ellean 						 Ah! You seem to have been very, very eager to tell your tale.

					 						 Paula 						 No, I wasn’t eager, Ellean. I’d have given something not to have had to do it. I wasn’t eager.

					 						 Ellean 						 Not! Oh, I think you might safely have spared us all for a little while.

					 						 Paula 						 But, Ellean, you forget I⁠—I am your stepmother. It was my⁠—my duty⁠—to tell your father what I⁠—what I knew⁠—

					 						 Ellean 						 What you knew! Why, after all, what can you know! You can only speak from gossip, report, hearsay! How is it possible that you⁠—! She stops abruptly. The two women stand staring at each other for a moment; then Ellean backs away from Paula slowly. Paula!

					 						 Paula 						 What⁠—what’s the matter?

					 						 Ellean 						 You⁠—you knew Captain Ardale in London!

					 						 Paula 						 Why⁠—what do you mean?

					 						 Ellean 						 Oh!

					 						 						 							She makes for the door, but Paula catches her by the wrist.

					 						 Paula 						 You shall tell me what you mean!

					 						 Ellean 						 Ah! Suddenly looking fixedly in Paula’s face. You know what I mean.

					 						 Paula 						 You accuse me!

					 						 Ellean 						 It’s in your face!

					 						 Paula 						 Hoarsely. You⁠—you think I’m⁠—that sort of creature, do you?

					 						 Ellean 						 Let me go!

					 						 Paula 						 Answer me! You’ve always hated me! Shaking her. Out with it!

					 						 Ellean 						 You hurt me!

					 						 Paula 						 You’ve always hated me! You shall answer me!

					 						 Ellean 						 Well, then, I have always⁠—always⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 What?

					 						 Ellean 						 I have always known what you were!

					 						 Paula 						 Ah! Who⁠—who told you?

					 						 Ellean 						 Nobody but yourself. From the first moment I saw you I knew you were altogether unlike the good women I’d left; directly I saw you I knew what my father had done. You’ve wondered why I’ve turned from you! There⁠—that’s the reason! Oh, but this is a horrible way for the truth to come home to everyone! Oh!

					 						 Paula 						 It’s a lie! It’s all a lie! Forcing Ellean down upon her knees. You shall beg my pardon for it. Ellean utters a loud shriek of terror. Ellean, I’m a good woman! I swear I am! I’ve always been a good woman! You dare to say I’ve ever been anything else! It’s a lie!

					 						 						 							Throwing her off violently.

					 						 						 							Aubrey re-enters.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula! Paula staggers back as Aubrey advances. Raising Ellean. What’s this? What’s this?

					 						 Ellean 						 Faintly. Nothing. It⁠—it’s my fault. Father, I⁠—I don’t wish to see Captain Ardale again.

					 						 						 							She goes out, Aubrey slowly following her to the door.

					 						 Paula 						 Aubrey, she⁠—she guesses.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Guesses?

					 						 Paula 						 About me⁠—and Ardale.

					 						 Aubrey 						 About you⁠—and Ardale?

					 						 Paula 						 She says she suspected my character from the beginning … that’s why she’s always kept me at a distance … and now she sees through⁠—

					 						 						 							She falters; he helps her to the ottoman, where she sits.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Bending over her. Paula, you must have said something⁠—admitted something⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 I don’t think so. It⁠—it’s in my face.

					 						 Aubrey 						 What?

					 						 Paula 						 She tells me so. She’s right! I’m tainted through and through; anybody can see it, anybody can find it out. You said much the same to me tonight.

					 						 Aubrey 						 If she has got this idea into her head we must drive it out, that’s all. We must take steps to⁠—What shall we do? We had better⁠—better⁠—What⁠—what?

					 						 						 							Sitting and staring before him.

					 						 Paula 						 Ellean! So meek, so demure! You’ve often said she reminded you of her mother. Yes, I know now what your first marriage was like.

					 						 Aubrey 						 We must drive this idea out of her head. We’ll do something. What shall we do?

					 						 Paula 						 She’s a regular woman too. She could forgive him easily enough⁠—but me! That’s just a woman!

					 						 Aubrey 						 What can we do?

					 						 Paula 						 Why, nothing! She’d have no difficulty in following up her suspicions. Suspicions! You should have seen how she looked at me! He buries his head in his hands. There is silence for a time, then she rises slowly, and goes and sits beside him. Aubrey!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes.

					 						 Paula 						 I’m very sorry.

					 						 						 							Without meeting her eyes, he lays his hand on her arm for a moment.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Well, we must look things straight in the face. Glancing round. At any rate, we’ve done with this.

					 						 Paula 						 I suppose so. After a brief pause. Of course, she and I can’t live under the same roof any more. You know she kissed me tonight, of her own accord.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I asked her to alter towards you.

					 						 Paula 						 That was it, then.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I⁠—I’m sorry I sent her away.

					 						 Paula 						 It was my fault; I made it necessary.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Perhaps now she’ll propose to return to the convent⁠—well, she must.

					 						 Paula 						 Would you like to keep her with you and⁠—and leave me?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula⁠—!

					 						 Paula 						 You needn’t be afraid I’d go back to⁠—what I was. I couldn’t.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Sssh, for God’s sake! We⁠—you and I⁠—we’ll get out of this place … what a fool I was to come here again!

					 						 Paula 						 You lived here with your first wife!

					 						 Aubrey 						 We’ll get out of this place and go abroad again, and begin afresh.

					 						 Paula 						 Begin afresh?

					 						 Aubrey 						 There’s no reason why the future shouldn’t be happy for us⁠—no reason that I can see⁠—

					 						 Paula 						 Aubrey!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes?

					 						 Paula 						 You’ll never forget this, you know.

					 						 Aubrey 						 This?

					 						 Paula 						 Tonight, and everything that’s led up to it. Our coming here, Ellean, our quarrels⁠—cat and dog!⁠—Mrs. Cortelyon, the Orreyeds, this man! What an everlasting nightmare for you!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Oh, we can forget it, if we choose.

					 						 Paula 						 That was always your cry. How can one do it!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Well make our calculations solely for the future, talk about the future, think about the future.

					 						 Paula 						 I believe the future is only the past again, entered through another gate.

					 						 Aubrey 						 That’s an awful belief.

					 						 Paula 						 Tonight proves it. You must see now that, do what we will, go where we will, you’ll be continually reminded of⁠—what I was. I see it.

					 						 Aubrey 						 You’re frightened tonight; meeting this man has frightened you. But that sort of thing isn’t likely to recur. The world isn’t quite so small as all that.

					 						 Paula 						 Isn’t it! The only great distances it contains are those we carry within ourselves⁠—the distances that separate husbands and wives, for instance. And so it’ll be with us. You’ll do your best⁠—oh, I know that⁠—you’re a good fellow. But circumstances will be too strong for you in the end, mark my words.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula⁠—!

					 						 Paula 						 Of course I’m pretty now⁠—I’m pretty still⁠—and a pretty woman, whatever else she may be, is always⁠—well, endurable. But even now I notice that the lines of my face are getting deeper; so are the hollows about my eyes. Yes, my face is covered with little shadows that usen’t to be there. Oh, I know I’m “going off.” I hate paint and dye and those messes, but, by-and-by, I shall drift the way of the others; I shan’t be able to help myself. And then, some day⁠—perhaps very suddenly, under a queer, fantastic light at night or in the glare of the morning⁠—that horrid, irresistible truth that physical repulsion forces on men and women will come to you, and you’ll sicken at me.

					 						 Aubrey 						 I⁠—!

					 						 Paula 						 You’ll see me then, at last, with other people’s eyes; you’ll see me just as your daughter does now, as all wholesome folks see women like me. And I shall have no weapon to fight with⁠—not one serviceable little bit of prettiness left me to defend myself with! A worn-out creature⁠—broken up, very likely, sometime before I ought to be⁠—my hair bright, my eyes dull, my body too thin or too stout, my cheeks raddled and ruddled⁠—a ghost, a wreck, a caricature, a candle that gutters, call such an end what you like! Oh, Aubrey, what shall I be able to say to you then? And this is the future you talk about! I know it⁠—I know it! He is still sitting staring forward; she rocks herself to and fro as if in pain. Oh, Aubrey! Oh! Oh!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Paula⁠—!

					 						 						 							Trying to comfort her.

					 						 Paula 						 Oh, and I wanted so much to sleep tonight! Laying her head upon his shoulder. From the distance, in the garden, there comes the sound of Drummle’s voice; he is singing as he approaches the house. That’s Cayley, coming back from The Warren. Starting up. He doesn’t know, evidently. I⁠—I won’t see him!

					 						 						 							She goes out quickly. Drummle’s voice comes nearer. Aubrey rouses himself and snatches up a book from the table, making a pretence of reading. After a moment or two, Drummle appears at the window and looks in.

					 						 Drummle 						 Aha! my dear chap!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Cayley?

					 						 Drummle 						 Coming into the room. I went down to The Warren after you?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Yes?

					 						 Drummle 						 Missed you. Well? I’ve been gossiping with Mrs. Cortelyon. Confound you, I’ve heard the news!

					 						 Aubrey 						 What have you heard?

					 						 Drummle 						 What have I heard! Why⁠—Ellean and young Ardale! Looking at Aubrey keenly. My dear Aubrey! Alice is under the impression that you are inclined to look on the affair favourably.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Rising and advancing to Drummle. You’ve not⁠—met⁠—Captain Ardale?

					 						 Drummle 						 No. Why do you ask? By-the-by, I don’t know that I need tell you⁠—but it’s rather strange. He’s not at The Warren tonight.

					 						 Aubrey 						 No?

					 						 Drummle 						 He left the house half-an-hour ago, to stroll about the lanes; just now a note came from him, a scribble in pencil, simply telling Alice that she would receive a letter from him tomorrow. What’s the matter? There’s nothing very wrong, is there! My dear chap, pray forgive me if I’m asking too much.

					 						 Aubrey 						 Cayley, you⁠—you urged me to send her away!

					 						 Drummle 						 Ellean! Yes, yes. But⁠—but⁠—by all accounts this is quite an eligible young fellow. Alice has been giving me the history⁠—

					 						 Aubrey 						 Curse him! Hurling his book to the floor. Curse him! Yes, I do curse him⁠—him and his class! Perhaps I curse myself too in doing it. He has only led “a man’s life”⁠—just as I, how many of us, have done! The misery he has brought on me and mine it’s likely enough we, in our time, have helped to bring on others by this leading “a man’s life”! But I do curse him for all that. My God, I’ve nothing more to fear⁠—I’ve paid my fine! And so I can curse him in safety. Curse him! Curse him!

					 						 Drummle 						 In Heaven’s name, tell me what’s happened?

					 						 Aubrey 						 Gripping Drummle’s arm. Paula! Paula!

					 						 Drummle 						 What?

					 						 Aubrey 						 They met tonight here. They⁠—they⁠—they’re not strangers to each other.

					 						 Drummle 						 Aubrey!

					 						 Aubrey 						 Curse him! My poor, wretched wife! My poor, wretched wife!

					 						 						 							The door opens and Ellean appears. The two men turn to her. There is a moment’s silence.

					 						 Ellean 						 Father … father … !

					 						 Aubrey 						 Ellean?

					 						 Ellean 						 I⁠—I want you. He goes to her. Father … go to Paula! He looks into her face, startled. Quickly⁠—quickly! He passes her to go out, she seizes his arm, with a cry. No, no; don’t go!

					 						 						 							He shakes her off and goes. Ellean staggers back towards Drummle.

					 						 Drummle 						 To Ellean. What do you mean? What do you mean?

					 						 Ellean 						 I⁠—I went to her room⁠—to tell her I was sorry for something I had said to her. And I was sorry⁠—I was sorry. I heard the fall. I⁠—I’ve seen her. It’s horrible.

					 						 Drummle 						 She⁠—she has⁠—!

					 						 Ellean 						 Killed⁠—herself? Yes⁠—yes. So everybody will say. But I know⁠—I helped to kill her. If I had only been merciful!

					 						 						 							She faints upon the ottoman. He pauses for a moment irresolutely⁠—then he goes to the door, opens it, and stands looking out.





				 				 			 			The Second Mrs. Tanqueray

			was published in 1893 by

			Arthur W. Pinero.

			This ebook was produced for the

			Standard Ebooks project

			by

			B. Timothy Keith,

			and is based on a transcription produced in 2012 by

			K. Nordquist, JoAnn Greenwood, and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team

			for

			Project Gutenberg

			and on digital scans available at the

			HathiTrust Digital Library.

			The cover page is adapted from

			Madame Lerolle,

			a painting completed in 1882 by

			Henri Fantin-Latour.

			The cover and title pages feature the

			League Spartan and Sorts Mill Goudy

			typefaces created in 2014 and 2009 by

			The League of Moveable Type.

			The first edition of this ebook was released on

			March 14, 2019, 3:41 p.m.

			You can check for updates to this ebook, view its revision history, or download it for different ereading systems at

			standardebooks.org/ebooks/arthur-w-pinero/the-second-mrs-tanqueray.

			The volunteer-driven Standard Ebooks project relies on readers like you to submit typos, corrections, and other improvements. Anyone can contribute at standardebooks.org.





Uncopyright


			 				 					May you do good and not evil.

					 					May you find forgiveness for yourself and forgive others.

					 					May you share freely, never taking more than you give.





			Copyright pages exist to tell you can’t do something. Unlike them, this Uncopyright page exists to tell you, among other things, that the writing and artwork in this ebook are believed to be in the U.S. public domain. The U.S. public domain represents our collective cultural heritage, and items in it are free for anyone in the U.S. to do almost anything at all with, without having to get permission. Public domain items are free of copyright restrictions.

			Copyright laws are different around the world. If you’re not located in the U.S., check with your local laws before using this ebook.

			Non-authorship activities performed on public domain items⁠—so-called “sweat of the brow” work⁠—don’t create a new copyright. That means nobody can claim a new copyright on a public domain item for work like digitization, markup, or typography. Regardless, to dispel any possible doubt on the copyright status of this ebook, Standard Ebooks and its contributors release this ebook under the terms in the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication, thus dedicating to the worldwide public domain all of the work they’ve done on this ebook, including but not limited to metadata, the titlepage, imprint, colophon, this Uncopyright, and any changes or enhancements to, or markup on, the original text and artwork. This dedication doesn’t change the copyright status of the underlying works, which, though believed to already be in the U.S. public domain, may not yet be in the public domain of other countries. We make this dedication in the interest of enriching our global cultural heritage, to promote free and libre culture around the world, and to give back to the unrestricted culture that has given all of us so much.

			 				Standard Ebooks and its contributors offer this ebook as-is and make no representations or warranties of any kind concerning this ebook, express, implied, statutory or otherwise, including without limitation warranties of title, merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non infringement, or the absence of latent or other defects, accuracy, or the presence or absence of errors, whether or not discoverable, all to the greatest extent permissible under applicable law.





